# Aggregate Functions

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 30 minutes

## Overview

Using COUNT, SUM, AVG, MAX, MIN to calculate summary values

📖 *Source: Page 180, Page 181, Page 182, Page 183, Page 184, Page 185, Page 186, Page 187, Page 188*

## Definition

SQL: QueT~ie8] Constraints] Triggers 145 $ r-~'-'-'~ -.------- -~--- ,.,.._,---..-- , ,-, ,-_ , . --------- I Relational Algebra and SQL: Nesting of queries is a feature that is not I available in relational algebra, but nested queries can be translated into i algebra, as we will see in Chapter 15. Nesting in SQL is inspired more by , relational calculus than algebra. In conjunction with some of SQL's other features, such as (multi)set operators and aggregation, nesting is a very expressive construct. This section discusses only subqueries that appear in the WHERE clause. The treatment of subqueries appearing elsewhere is quite similar. Some examples of subqueries that appear in the FROM clause are discussed later in Section 5.5.1. 5.4.1 Introduction to Nested Queries As an example, let us rewrite the following query, which we discussed earlier, using a nested subquery: (Ql) Find the names of sailors who have reserved boat 103. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S S.sid IN ( SELECT FROM WHERE R.sid Reserves R R.bid = 103 ) The nested subquery computes the (multi)set of sids for

boat 103. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S S.sid IN ( SELECT FROM WHERE R.sid Reserves R R.bid = 103 ) The nested subquery computes the (multi)set of sids for sailors who have re- served boat 103 (the set contains 22,31, and 74 on instances R2 and 83), and the top-level query retrieves the names of sailors whose sid is in this set. The IN operator allows us to test whether a value is in a given set of elements; an SQL query is used to generate the set to be tested. Note that it is very easy to modify this query to find all sailors who have not reserved boat 103-we can just replace IN by NOT IN! The best way to understand a nested query is to think of it in terms of a con- ceptual evaluation strategy. In our example, the strategy consists of examining rows in Sailors and, for each such row, evaluating the subquery over Reserves. In general, the conceptual evaluation strategy that we presented for defining the semantics of a query can be extended

Sailors and, for each such row, evaluating the subquery over Reserves. In general, the conceptual evaluation strategy that we presented for defining the semantics of a query can be extended to cover nested queries as follows: Construct the cross-product of the tables in the FROM clause of the top-level query as hefore. For each row in the cross-product, while testing the qllalifica-

146 tion in the WHERE clause, (re)compute the subquery.5 Of course, the subquery might itself contain another nested subquery, in which case we apply the same idea one more time, leading to an evaluation strategy \vith several levels of nested loops. As an example of a multiply nested query, let us rewrite the following query. (Q2) Find the names of sailors 'who ha'ue reserved a red boat. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S S.sid IN ( SELECT R.sid FROM Reserves R WHERE R.bid IN (SELECT B.bid FROM Boats B WHERE B.color = 'red' The innermost subquery finds the set of bids of red boats (102 and 104 on instance E1). The subquery one level above finds the set of sids of sailors who have reserved one of these boats. On instances E1, R2, and 83, this set of sids contains 22, 31, and 64. The top-level query finds the names of sailors whose sid is in this set of sids; we get Dustin, Lubber, and Horatio. To find the names of sailors who have not reserved a red boat, wc

of sailors whose sid is in this set of sids; we get Dustin, Lubber, and Horatio. To find the names of sailors who have not reserved a red boat, wc replace the outermost occurrence of IN by NOT IN, as illustrated in the next query. (Q21) Find the names of sailors who have not reserved a red boat. SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S WHERE S.sid NOT IN ( SELECT FROM WHERE R.sid Reserves R R.bid IN ( SELECT B.bid FROM Boats B WHERE B.color = 'red' ) This qucry computes the names of sailors whose sid is not in the set 22, 31, and 64. In contrast to Query Q21, we can modify the previous query (the nested version of Q2) by replacing the inner occurrence (rather than the outer occurence) of 5Since the inner subquery in our example does not depend on the 'current' row from the outer query ill any way, you rnight wonder why we have to recompute the subquery for each outer row. For an answer, see Section 5.4.2.

SQL: Queries, Con.,trf1'inis, Triggers IN with NOT IN. This modified query would compute the naU1eS of sailors who have reserved a boat that is not red, that is, if they have a reservation, it is not for a red boat. Let us consider how. In the inner query, we check that R.bid is not either 102 or 104 (the bids of red boats). The outer query then finds the sids in Reserves tuples \vhere the bid is not 102 or 104. On instances E1, R2, and 53, the outer query computes the set of sids 22, 31, 64, and 74. Finally, we find the names of sailors whose sid is in this set. \Ve can also modify the nested query Q2 by replacing both occurrences of IN with NOT IN. This variant finds the names of sailors who have not reserved a boat that is not red, that is, who have reserved only red boats (if they've re- served any boats at all). Proceeding as in the previous paragraph, on instances E1, R2, and 53, the outer query computes the

have reserved only red boats (if they've re- served any boats at all). Proceeding as in the previous paragraph, on instances E1, R2, and 53, the outer query computes the set of sids (in Sailors) other than 22, 31, 64, and 74. This is the set 29, 32, 58, 71, 85, and 95. We then find the names of sailors whose sid is in this set. 5.4.2 Correlated Nested Queries In the nested queries seen thus far, the inner subquery has been completely independent of the outer query. In general, the inner subquery could depend on the row currently being examined in the outer query (in terms of our conceptual evaluation strategy). Let us rewrite the following query once more. (Q1) Pind the names of sailors who have reserved boat nv,mber 103. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S EXISTS ( SELECT * FROM Reserves R WHERE R.bid = 103 AND R.sid = S.sid ) The EXISTS operator is another set comparison operator, such as IN. It allows us to test whether a set is nonempty, an implicit comparison with the

R.sid = S.sid ) The EXISTS operator is another set comparison operator, such as IN. It allows us to test whether a set is nonempty, an implicit comparison with the empty set. Thus, for each Sailor row 5, we test whether the set of Reserves rows R such that R.bid = 103 AND S.sid = R.sid is nonempty. If so, sailor 5 has reserved boat t03, and we retrieve the name. '1'he subquery clearly depends on the current row Sand IIlUSt be re-evaluated for each row in Sailors. The occurrence of S in the subquery (in the form of the literal S.sid) is called a cOTTelation, and such queries are called con-elated queries. This query also illustrates the use of the special symbol * in situations where all we want to do is to check that a qualifying row exists, and do Hot really

## Syntax

148 CHAPTER,.5 want to retrieve any columns from the row. This is one of the two uses of * in the SELECT clause that is good programming style; the other is &':1 an argument of the COUNT aggregate operation, which we describe shortly. As a further example, by using NOT EXISTS instead of EXISTS, we can compute the names of sailors who have not reserved a red boat. Closely related to EXISTS is the UNIQUE predicate. \Vhen we apply UNIQUE to a subquery, the resulting condition returns true if no row appears twice in the answer to the subquery, that is, there are no duplicates; in particular, it returns true if the answer is empty. (And there is also a NOT UNI QUE version.) 5.4.3 Set-Comparison Operators We have already seen the set-comparison operators EXISTS, IN, and UNIQUE, along with their negated versions. SQL also supports op ANY and op ALL, where op is one of the arithmetic comparison operators {<, <=, =, <>, >=, >}. (SOME is also available, but it is just a synonym for ANY.) (Q22) Find

ALL, where op is one of the arithmetic comparison operators {<, <=, =, <>, >=, >}. (SOME is also available, but it is just a synonym for ANY.) (Q22) Find sailors whose rating is better than some sailor called Horatio. SELECT S.sid FROM Sailors S WHERE S.rating > ANY ( SELECT FROM WHERE S2.rating Sailors S2 S2.sname = 'Horatio' ) If there are several sailors called Horatio, this query finds all sailors whose rating is better than that of some sailor called Horatio. On instance 83, this computes the sids 31, 32, 58, 71, and 74. \\That if there were no sailor called Horatio? In this case the comparison S.rating > ANY ... is defined to return false, and the query returns an elnpty answer set. To understand comparisons involving ANY, it is useful to think of the comparison being carried out repeatedly. In this example, S. rating is successively compared with each rating value that is an answer to the nested query. Intuitively, the subquery must return a row that makes the comparison true, in order for S. rat'ing

compared with each rating value that is an answer to the nested query. Intuitively, the subquery must return a row that makes the comparison true, in order for S. rat'ing > ANY ... to return true. (Q23) Find sailors whose rating is better than every sailor' called Horat·to. vVe can obtain all such queries with a simple modification to Query Q22: Just replace ANY with ALL in the WHERE clause of the outer query. On instance 8~~, we would get the sid", 58 and 71. If there were no sailor called Horatio, the comparison S.rating > ALL ... is defined to return true! The query would then return the names of all sailors. Again, it is useful to think of the comparison

SQL: C2uerie,s, ConstTain,ts, Triggers 149 being carried out repeatedly. Intuitively, the comparison must be true for every returned row for S.rating> ALL ... to return true. As another illustration of ALL, consider the following query. (Q24J Find the 8ailor's with the highest rating. SELECT S.sid FROM Sailors S WHERE S.rating >= ALL ( SELECT S2.rating FROM Sailors S2 ) The subquery computes the set of all rating values in Sailors. The outer WHERE condition is satisfied only when S.rating is greater than or equal to each of these rating values, that is, when it is the largest rating value. In the instance 53, the condition is satisfied only for rating 10, and the answer includes the sid." of sailors with this rating, Le., 58 and 71. Note that IN and NOT IN are equivalent to = ANY and <> ALL, respectively. 5.4.4 More Examples of Nested Queries Let us revisit a query that we considered earlier using the INTERSECT operator. (Q6) Find the names of sailors who have reserved both a red and a green boat. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname

a query that we considered earlier using the INTERSECT operator. (Q6) Find the names of sailors who have reserved both a red and a green boat. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S, Reserves R, Boats B S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = B.bid AND B.color = 'red' AND S.sid IN ( SELECT S2.sid FROM Sailors S2, Boats B2, Reserves R2 WHERE S2.sid = R2.sid AND R2.bid = B2.bid AND B2.color = 'green' ) This query can be understood as follows: "Find all sailors who have reserved a red boat and, further, have sids that are included in the set of sids of sailors who have reserved a green boat." This formulation of the query illustrates how queries involving INTERSECT can be rewritten using IN, which is useful to know if your system does not support INTERSECT. Queries using EXCEPT can be similarly rewritten by using NOT IN. To find the side:, of sailors who have reserved red boats but not green boats, we can simply replace the keyword IN in the previous query by NOT IN.

## Examples

150 CHAPTER"S As it turns out, writing this query (Q6) using INTERSECT is more complicated because we have to use sids to identify sailors (while intersecting) and have to return sailor names: SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S WHERE S.sid IN (( SELECT R.sid FROM Boats B, Reserves R WHERE R.bid = B.bid AND B.color = 'red' ) INTERSECT (SELECT R2.sid FROM Boats B2, Reserves R2 WHERE R2.bid = B2.bid AND B2.color = 'green' )) Our next example illustrates how the division operation in relational algebra can be expressed in SQL. (Q9) Find the names of sailors who have TeseTved all boats. SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S WHERE NOT EXISTS (( SELECT B.bid FROM Boats B ) EXCEPT (SELECT R.bid FROM Reserves R WHERE R.sid = S.sid )) Note that this query is correlated--for each sailor S, we check to see that the set of boats reserved by S includes every boat. An alternative way to do this query without using EXCEPT follows: SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S WHERE NOT EXISTS ( SELECT FROM WHERE B.bid Boats B NOT EXISTS (

boat. An alternative way to do this query without using EXCEPT follows: SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S WHERE NOT EXISTS ( SELECT FROM WHERE B.bid Boats B NOT EXISTS ( SELECT R.bid FROM Reserves R WHERE R.bid = B.bid AND R.sid = S.sid )) Intuitively, for each sailor we check that there is no boat that has not been reserved by this sailor.

SQL: Q'ueT'ics. Constraint8, Triggers lQJ SQL:1999 Aggregate Functions: The collection of aggregate functions is greatly expanded in the new standard, including several statistical tions such as standard deviation, covariance, and percentiles. However, new aggregate functions are in the SQLjOLAP package and may not supported by all vendors. 5.5 AGGREGATE OPERATORS In addition to simply retrieving data, we often want to perform some compu- tation or summarization. As we noted earlier in this chapter, SQL allows the use of arithmetic expressions. We now consider a powerful class of constructs for computing aggregate values such as MIN and SUM. These features represent a significant extension of relational algebra. SQL supports five aggregate oper- ations, which can be applied on any column, say A, of a relation: 1. COUNT ([DISTINCT] A): The number of (unique) values in the A column. 2. SUM ([DISTINCT] A): The sum of all (unique) values in the A column. 3. AVG ([DISTINCT] A): The average of all (unique) values in the A column. 4. MAX (A): The maximum value in the A column. 5. MIN (A): The minimum

column. 3. AVG ([DISTINCT] A): The average of all (unique) values in the A column. 4. MAX (A): The maximum value in the A column. 5. MIN (A): The minimum value in the A column. Note that it does not make sense to specify DISTINCT in conjunction with MIN or MAX (although SQL does not preclude this). (Q25) Find the average age of all sailors. SELECT AVG (S.age) FROM Sailors S On instance 53, the average age is 37.4. Of course, the WHERE clause can be used to restrict the sailors considered in computing the average age. (Q26) Find the average age of sailors with a rating of 10. SELECT AVG (S.age) FROM Sailors S WHERE S.rating = 10 There are two such sailors, and their average age is 25.5. MIN (or MAX) can be used instead of AVG in the above queries to find the age of the youngest (oldest)

1,..') 0 ... sailor. However) finding both the name and the age of the oldest sailor is more tricky, as the next query illustrates. (Q,"21) Find the name and age of the oldest sailor. Consider the following attempt to answer this query: SELECT S.sname, MAX (S.age) FROM Sailors S The intent is for this query to return not only the maximum age but also the name of the sailors having that age. However, this query is illegal in SQL-if the SELECT clause uses an aggregate operation, then it must use only aggregate operations unless the query contains a GROUP BY clause! (The intuition behind this restriction should become clear when we discuss the GROUP BY clause in Section 5.5.1.) Therefore, we cannot use MAX (S.age) as well as S.sname in the SELECT clause. We have to use a nested query to compute the desired answer to Q27: SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname, S.age Sailors S S.age = ( SELECT MAX (S2.age) FROM Sailors S2 ) Observe that we have used the result of an aggregate operation in the subquery as an

S.sname, S.age Sailors S S.age = ( SELECT MAX (S2.age) FROM Sailors S2 ) Observe that we have used the result of an aggregate operation in the subquery as an argument to a comparison operation. Strictly speaking, we are comparing an age value with the result of the subquery, which is a relation. However, because of the use of the aggregate operation, the subquery is guaranteed to return a single tuple with a single field, and SQL Gonverts such a relation to a field value for the sake of the comparison. The following equivalent query for Q27 is legal in the SQL standard but, unfortunately, is not supported in many systems: SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname, S.age Sailors S ( SELECT MAX (S2.age) FROM Sailors S2 ) = S.age \Vc can count the number of sailors using COUNT. This exarnple illustrates the use of * as an argument to COUNT, which is useful when \ve want to count all rows. (Q28) Count the n:umbCT of sa:iloTs. SELECT COUNT (*)

## Common Mistakes

FROM Sailors S vVe can think of * as shorthand for all the columns (in the cross-product of the from-list in the FROM clause). Contrast this query with the following query, which computes the number of distinct sailor names. (Remember that ,'mame is not a key!) (Q29) Count the nmnber of d'i.fferent sailor names. SELECT COUNT ( DISTINCT S.sname ) FROM Sailors S On instance 83, the answer to Q28 is 10, whereas the answer to Q29 is 9 (because two sailors have the same name, Horatio). If DISTINCT is omitted, the answer to Q29 is 10, because the name Horatio is counted twice. If COUNT does not include DISTINCT, then COUNT (*) gives the same answer as COUNT (x) , where x is any set of attributes. In our example, without DISTINCT Q29 is equivalent to Q28. However, the use of COUNT (*) is better querying style, since it is immediately clear that all records contribute to the total count. Aggregate operations offer an alternative to the ANY and ALL constructs. For example, consider the following query: (Q30) Find

is immediately clear that all records contribute to the total count. Aggregate operations offer an alternative to the ANY and ALL constructs. For example, consider the following query: (Q30) Find the names of sailors who are older than the oldest sailor with a rating of 10. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S S.age > ( SELECT MAX ( S2.age ) FROM Sailors S2 WHERE S2.rating = 10 ) On instance 83, the oldest sailor with rating 10 is sailor 58, whose age is ~j5. The names of older sailors are Bob, Dustin, Horatio, and Lubber. Using ALL, this query could alternatively be written as follows: SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S WHERE S.age > ALL ( SELECT FROM WHERE S2.age Sailors S2 S2.rating = 10 ) However, the ALL query is more error proncone could easily (and incorrectly!) use ANY instead of ALL, and retrieve sailors who are older than some sailor with

## Related Concepts

- [group-by](./group-by.md)
- [having-clause](./having-clause.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `aggregation` `functions`
