# Database Design

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 50 minutes

## Overview

How to design databases using ERDs and normalization

📖 *Source: Page 320, Page 321, Page 322, Page 323, Page 324, Page 325, Page 326, Page 327, Page 328, Page 329, Page 330, Page 331*

## Definition

Storage and Inde:r'ing 285 f Insert: \Ve assume that records are always inserted at the end of the file. \¥e must fetch the last page in the file, add the record, and write the page back. The cost is 2D + C. Delete: We must find the record, remove the record from the page, and write the modified page back. vVe assume that no attempt is made to compact the file to reclaim the free space created by deletions, for simplicity. 1 The cost is the cost of searching plus C + D. We assume that the record to be deleted is specified using the record id. Since the page id can easily be obtained from the record id, we can directly read in the page. The cost of searching is therefore D. If the record to be deleted is specified using an equality or range condition on some fields, the cost of searching is given in our discussion of equality and range selections. The cost of deletion is also affected by the number of qualifying records, since all pages

the cost of searching is given in our discussion of equality and range selections. The cost of deletion is also affected by the number of qualifying records, since all pages containing such records must be modified. 8.4.3 Sorted Files Scan: The cost is B(D +RC) because all pages must be examined. Note that this case is no better or worse than the case of unordered files. However, the order in which records are retrieved corresponds to the sort order, that is, all records in age order, and for a given age, by sal order. Search with Equality Selection: We assume that the equality selection matches the sort order (age, sal). In other words, we assume that a selection condition is specified on at leclst the first field in the composite key (e.g., age = 30). If not (e.g., selection sal = t50 or department = "Toy"), the sort order does not help us and the cost is identical to that for a heap file. We can locate the first page containing the desired record or records, should any qualifying records

not help us and the cost is identical to that for a heap file. We can locate the first page containing the desired record or records, should any qualifying records exist, with a binary search in log2B steps. (This analysis assumes that the pages in the sorted file are stored sequentially, and we can retrieve the ith page on the file directly in one disk I/O.) Each step requires a disk I/O and two cornparisons. Once the page is known, the first qualifying record can again be located by a binary search of the page at a cost of Clog2R. The cost is Dlo92B+Clog2R, which is a significant improvement over searching heap files. ]In practice, a directory or other data structure is used to keep track of free space, and records are inserted into the first available free slot, as discussed in Chapter 9. This increases the cost of insertion and deletion a little, but not enough to affect our comparison.

286 CHAPTER~8 If several records qualify (e.g., "Find all employees aged 18"), they are guar- anteed to be adjacent to each other due to the sorting on age, and so the cost of retrieving all such records is the cost of locating the first such record (Dlog2B+Clog2R) plus the cost ofreading all the qualifying records in sequen- tial order. Typically, all qualifying records fit on a single page. If no records qualify, this is established by the search for the first qualifying record, which finds the page that would have contained a qualifying record, had one existed, and searches that page. Search with Range Selection: Again assuming that the range selection matches the composite key, the first record that satisfies the selection is located as for search with equality. Subsequently, data pages are sequentially retrieved until a record is found that does not satisfy the range selection; this is similar to an equality search with many qualifying records. The cost is the cost of search plus the cost of retrieving the set of records that satisfy the search. The cost

to an equality search with many qualifying records. The cost is the cost of search plus the cost of retrieving the set of records that satisfy the search. The cost of the search includes the cost of fetching the first page containing qualifying, or matching, records. For small range selections, all qualifying records appear on this page. For larger range selections, we have to fetch additional pages containing matching records. Insert: To insert a record while preserving the sort order, we must first find the correct position in the file, add the record, and then fetch and rewrite all subsequent pages (because all the old records are shifted by one slot, assuming that the file has no empty slots). On average, we can &'3sume that the inserted record belongs in the middle of the file. Therefore, we must read the latter half of the file and then write it back after adding the new record. The cost is that of searching to find the position of the new record plus 2 . (O.5B(D + RC)), that is, search cost plus

after adding the new record. The cost is that of searching to find the position of the new record plus 2 . (O.5B(D + RC)), that is, search cost plus B(D + RC). Delete: We must search for the record, remove the record from the page, and write the modified page back. We must also read and write all subsequent pages because all records that follow the deleted record must be moved up to cornpact the free space. 2 The cost is the same as for an insert, that is, search cost plus B(D + RC). Given the rid of the record to delete, we can fetch the page containing the record directly. If records to be deleted are specified by an equality or range condition, the cost of deletion depends on the number of qualifying records. If the condition is specified on the sort field, qualifying records are guaranteed to be contiguous, and the first qualifying record can be located using binary search. 2Unlike a heap file. there is no inexpensive way to manage free space, so we account

to be contiguous, and the first qualifying record can be located using binary search. 2Unlike a heap file. there is no inexpensive way to manage free space, so we account for the cost of compacting it file when il record is deleted.

il Storage and Indexing 8.4.4 Clustered Files In a clustered file, extensive empirical study has shown that pages are usually at about 67 percent occupancy. Thus, the Humber of physical data pages is about 1.5B, and we use this observation in the following analysis. Scan: The cost of a scan is 1.5B(D + RC) because all data pages must be examined; this is similar to sorted files, with the obvious adjustment for the increased number of data pages. Note that our cost metric does not capture potential differences in cost due to sequential I/O. We would expect sorted files to be superior in this regard, although a clustered file using ISAM (rather than B+ trees) would be close. Search with Equality Selection: We assume that the equality selection matches the search key (age, sal). We can locate the first page containing the desired record or records, should any qualifying records exist, in logF1.5B steps, that is, by fetching all pages from the root to the appropriate leaf. In practice, the root page is likely to be in the buffer pool

exist, in logF1.5B steps, that is, by fetching all pages from the root to the appropriate leaf. In practice, the root page is likely to be in the buffer pool and we save an I/O, but we ignore this in our simplified analysis. Each step requires a disk I/O and two comparisons. Once the page is known, the first qualifying record can again be located by a binary search of the page at a cost of Clog2R. The cost is DlogF1.5B +Clog2R, which is a significant improvement over searching even sorted files. If several records qualify (e.g., "Find all employees aged 18"), they are guar- anteed to be adjacent to each other due to the sorting on age, and so the cost of retrieving all such records is the cost of locating the first such record (Dlogp1.5B + Clog2R) plus the cost of reading all the qualifying records in sequential order. Search with Range Selection: Again assuming that the range selection matches the composite key, the first record that satisfies the selection is located a..'3 it is for search with

order. Search with Range Selection: Again assuming that the range selection matches the composite key, the first record that satisfies the selection is located a..'3 it is for search with equality. Subsequently, data pages are sequentially retrieved (using the next and previous links at the leaf level) until a record is found that does not satisfy the range selection; this is similar to an equality search with many qualifying records. Insert: To insert a record, we must first find the correct leaf page in the index, reading every page from root to leaf. Then, we must add the llew record. Most of the time, the leaf page has sufficient space for the new record, and all we need to do is to write out the modified leaf page. Occasionally, the leaf is full and we need to retrieve and modify other pages, but this is sufficiently rare

## Explanation

288 CHAPTER :8 that we can ignore it in this simplified analysis. The cost is therefore the cost of search plus one write, DlogF L5B + Clog2R + D. Delete: \;Ye must search for the record, remove the record from the page, and write the modified page back. The discussion and cost analysis for insert applies here as well. 8.4.5 Heap File with Unclustered Tree Index The number of leaf pages in an index depends on the size of a data entry. We assume that each data entry in the index is a tenth the size of an em- ployee data record, which is typical. The number of leaf pages in the index is o.1(L5B) = O.15B, if we take into account the 67 percent occupancy of index pages. Similarly, the number of data entries on a page 10(0.67R) = 6.7R, taking into account the relative size and occupancy. Scan: Consider Figure 8.1, which illustrates an unclustered index. To do a full scan of the file of employee records, we can scan the leaf level of the index and for

Consider Figure 8.1, which illustrates an unclustered index. To do a full scan of the file of employee records, we can scan the leaf level of the index and for each data entry, fetch the corresponding data record from the underlying file, obtaining data records in the sort order (age, sal). We can read all data entries at a cost of O.15B(D + 6.7RC) l/Os. Now comes the expensive part: We have to fetch the employee record for each data entry in the index. The cost of fetching the employee records is one I/O per record, since the index is unclustered and each data entry on a leaf page of the index could point to a different page in the employee file. The cost of this step is B R(D + C), which is prohibitively high. If we want the employee records in sorted order, we would be better off ignoring the index and scanning the employee file directly, and then sorting it. A simple rule of thumb is that a file can be sorted by a two-Pl1SS algorithm in

ignoring the index and scanning the employee file directly, and then sorting it. A simple rule of thumb is that a file can be sorted by a two-Pl1SS algorithm in which each pass requires reading and writing the entire file. Thus, the I/O cost of sorting a file with B pages is 4B, which is much less than the cost of using an unclustered index. Search with Equality Selection: \lVe assume that the equalit.y selection matches the sort order (age, sal). \Ve can locate the first page containing the desired data entry or entries, should any qualifying entries exist, in lagrO.15B steps, that is, by fetching all pages from the root to the appropriate leaf. Each step requires a disk I/O and two comparisons. Once the page is known, the first qua1ifying data entry can again be located by a binary search of the page at a cost of Clog2G. 7R. The first qualifying data record can be fetched fronl the employee file with another I/O. The cost is DlogpO.15B + Clag26.7R + D, which is a significant improvement over

7R. The first qualifying data record can be fetched fronl the employee file with another I/O. The cost is DlogpO.15B + Clag26.7R + D, which is a significant improvement over searching sorted files.

Storage and Inde:rzng 289 .~ If several records qualify (e.g., "Find all employees aged ISn ), they are not guaranteed to be adjacent to each other. The cost of retrieving all such records is the cost oflocating the first qualifying data entry (Dlo9pO.15B +Clo926.7R) plus one I/O per qualifying record. The cost of using an unclustered index is therefore very dependent on the number of qualifying records. Search with Range Selection: Again assuming that the range selection matches the composite key, the first record that satisfies the selection is located as it is for search with equality. Subsequently, data entries are sequentially retrieved (using the next and previous links at the leaf level of the index) until a data entry is found that does not satisfy the range selection. For each qualifying data entry, we incur one I/O to fetch the corresponding employee records. The cost can quickly become prohibitive as the number of records that satisfy the range selection increases. As a rule of thumb, if 10 percent of data records satisfy the selection condition, we are better off

as the number of records that satisfy the range selection increases. As a rule of thumb, if 10 percent of data records satisfy the selection condition, we are better off retrieving all employee records, sorting them, and then retaining those that satisfy the selection. Insert: "Ve must first insert the record in the employee heap file, at a cost of 2D + C. In addition, we must insert the corresponding data entry in the index. Finding the right leaf page costs Dl09pO.15B + Cl0926.7R, and writing it out after adding the new data entry costs another D. Delete: We need to locate the data record in the employee file and the data entry in the index, and this search step costs Dl09FO.15B + Cl0926.7R + D. Now, we need to write out the modified pages in the index and the data file, at a cost of 2D. 8.4.6 Heap File With Unclustered Hash Index As for unclustered tree indexes, we a.'3sume that each data entry is one tenth the size of a data record. vVe consider only static hashing in

With Unclustered Hash Index As for unclustered tree indexes, we a.'3sume that each data entry is one tenth the size of a data record. vVe consider only static hashing in our analysis, and for simplicity we a.'3sume that there are no overflow chains.a In a static ha.shed file, pages are kept at about SO percent occupancy (to leave space for future insertions and minimize overflows as the file expands). This is achieved by adding a new page to a bucket when each existing page is SO percent full, when records are initially loaded into a hashed file structure. The number of pages required to store data entries is therefore 1.2.5 times the number of pages when the entries are densely packed, that is, 1.25(0.10B) = O.125B. The number of data entries that fit on a page is 1O(O.80R) = 8R, taking into account the relative size and occupancy. :JThe dynamic variants of hashing are less susceptible to the problem of overflow chains, and have a slight.ly higher average cost per search, but are otherwise similar to the static version.

290 CHAPTER 8 Scan: As for an unclustered tree index, all data entries can be retrieved in- expensively, at a cost of O.125B(D + 8RC) I/Os. However, for each entry, we incur the additional cost of one I/O to fetch the corresponding data record; the cost of this step is BR(D + C). This is prohibitively expensive, and further, results are unordered. So no one ever scans a hash index. Search with Equality Selection: This operation is supported very efficiently for matching selections, that is, equality conditions are specified for each field in the composite search key (age, sal). The cost of identifying the page that contains qualifying data entries is H. Assuming that this bucket consists of just one page (i.e., no overflow pages), retrieving it costs D. If we assume that we find the data entry after scanning half the records on the page, the cost of scanning the page is O.5(8R)C = 4RC. Finally, we have to fetch the data record from the employee file, which is another D. The total cost is therefore H + 2D

the page is O.5(8R)C = 4RC. Finally, we have to fetch the data record from the employee file, which is another D. The total cost is therefore H + 2D + 4RC, which is even lower than the cost for a tree index. If several records qualify, they are not guaranteed to be adjacent to each other. The cost of retrieving all such records is the cost of locating the first qualifying data entry (H+D+4RC) plus one I/O per qualifying record. The cost of using an unclustered index therefore depends heavily on the number of qualifying records. Search with Range Selection: The hash structure offers no help, and the entire heap file of employee records must be scanned at a cost of B(D + RC). Insert: We must first insert the record in the employee heap file, at a cost of 2D + C. In addition, the appropriate page in the index must be located, modified to insert a new data entry, and then written back. The additional cost is H + 2D + C. Delete: We need to locate

the index must be located, modified to insert a new data entry, and then written back. The additional cost is H + 2D + C. Delete: We need to locate the data record in the employee file and the data entry in the index; this search step costs H + 2D + 4RC. Now, we need to write out the modified pages in the index and the data file, at a cost of 2D. 8.4.7 Comparison of I/O Costs Figure 8.4 compares I/O costs for the various file organizations that we dis- cussed. A heap file has good storage efficiency and supports fast scanning and insertion of records. However, it is slow for searches and deletions. A sorted file also offers good storage efficiency. but insertion and ddetion of records is slow. Searches are fa.ster than in heap files. It is worth noting that, in a real DBMS, a file is almost never kept fully sorted.

Storage and Inde:r'lng 29) Search+ D Sorted BD Dlog2B Dlog2B +# Sear-ch + Sear-ch+ matching pages BD BD Clustered 1.5BD DlogF1.5B Dlo9F1.5B+# Sear-ch + Search+ matching pages D D Unclustered BD(R + D(l + D(lo9FO.15B+# D(3 + Sear-ch+ tree index 0.15) logFO.15B) matching recor-ds) logFO.15B) 2D Unclustered BD(R + 2D BD 4D Search+ hash index 0.125) 2D Figure 8.4 A Comparison of I/O Costs A clustered file offers all the advantages of a sorted file and supports inserts and deletes efficiently. (There is a space overhead for these benefits, relative to a sorted file, but the trade-off is well worth it.) Searches are even faster than in sorted files, although a sorted file can be faster when a large number of records are retrieved sequentially, because of blocked I/O efficiencies. Unclustered tree and hash indexes offer fast searches, insertion, and deletion, but scans and range searches with many matches are slow. Hash indexes are a little faster on equality searches, but they do not support range searches. In summary, Figure 8.4 demonstrates that no one file organization is uniformly superior

slow. Hash indexes are a little faster on equality searches, but they do not support range searches. In summary, Figure 8.4 demonstrates that no one file organization is uniformly superior in all situations. 8.5 INDEXES AND PERFORMANCE TUNING In this section, we present an overview of choices that arise when using indexes to improve performance in a database system. The choice of indexes has a tremendous impact on system performance, and must be made in the context of the expected workload, or typical mix of queries and update operations. A full discussion of indexes and performance requires an understanding of database query evaluation and concurrency control. We therefore return to this topic in Chapter 20, where we build on the discussion in this section. In particular, we discuss examples involving multiple tables in Chapter 20 because they require an understanding of join algorithms and query evaluation plans.

## Examples

292 CHAPTER. 8 8.5.1 Impact of the Workload The first thing to consider is the expected workload and the common opera- tions. Different file organizations and indexes, a:"l we have seen, support different operations well. In generaL an index supports efficient retrieval of data entries that satisfy a given selection condition. Recall from the previous section that there are two important kinds of selections: equality selection and range selection. Hash- based indexing techniques are optimized only for equality selections and fa.re poorly on range selections. where they are typically worse than scanning the entire file of records. Tree-based indexing techniques support both kinds of selection conditions efficiently, explaining their widespread use. Both tree and hash indexes can support inserts, deletes, and updates quite efficiently. Tree-based indexes, in particular, offer a superior alternative to maintaining fully sorted files of records. In contrast to simply maintaining the data entries in a sorted file, our discussion of (B+ tree) tree-structured indexes in Section 8.3.2 highlights two important advantages over sorted files: 1. vVo can handle inserts and deletes of data entries efficiently. 2.

file, our discussion of (B+ tree) tree-structured indexes in Section 8.3.2 highlights two important advantages over sorted files: 1. vVo can handle inserts and deletes of data entries efficiently. 2. Finding the correct leaf page when searching for a record by search key value is much faster than binary search of the pages in a sorted file. The one relative disadvantage is that the pages in a sorted file can be allocated in physical order on disk, making it much faster to retrieve several pages in sequential order. Of course. inserts and deletes on a sorted file are extremely expensive. A variant of B+ trees, called Indexed Sequential Access Method (ISAM), offers the benefit of sequential allocation of leaf pages, plus the benefit of fast searches. Inserts and deletes are not handled as well a'3 in B+ trees, but are rnuch better than in a sorted file. \Ve will study tree-structured indexing in detail in Cha,pter 10. 8.5.2 Clustered Index Organization As we smv in Section 8.2.1. a clustered index is really a file organization for the underlying data records.

tree-structured indexing in detail in Cha,pter 10. 8.5.2 Clustered Index Organization As we smv in Section 8.2.1. a clustered index is really a file organization for the underlying data records. Data records can be la.rge, and we should avoid replicating them; so there can be at most one clustered index on a given collec- tion of records. On the other hanel. we UU1 build several uncIustered indexes on a data file. Suppose that employee records are sorted by age, or stored in a clustered file with search keyage. If. in addition. we have an index on the sal field, the latter nlUst be an llnclllstered index. \:Ve can also build an uncIustered index on. say, depaThnent, if there is such a field.

Stomge and Inde:rin,g 29,3 Clustered indexes, while less expensive to maintain than a fully sorted file, are nonetJleless expensive to maintain. When a new record h&'3 to be inserted into a full leaf page, a new leaf page must be allocated and sorne existing records have to be moved to the new page. If records are identified by a combination of page id and slot, &'5 is typically the case in current database systems, all places in the datab&"ie that point to a moved record (typically, entries in other indexes for the same collection of records) must also be updated to point to the new location. Locating all such places and making these additional updates can involve several disk I/Os. Clustering must be used sparingly and only when justified by frequent queries that benefit from clustering. In particular, there is no good reason to build a clustered file using hashing, since range queries cannot be answered using h&c;h-indexcs. In dealing with the limitation that at most one index can be clustered, it is often useful to consider whether the information

since range queries cannot be answered using h&c;h-indexcs. In dealing with the limitation that at most one index can be clustered, it is often useful to consider whether the information in an index's search key is sufficient to answer the query. If so, modern database systems are intelligent enough to avoid fetching the actual data records. For example, if we have an index on age, and we want to compute the average age of employees, the DBMS can do this by simply examining the data entries in the index. This is an example of an index-only evaluation. In an index-only evaluation of a query we need not access the data records in the files that contain the relations in the query; we can evaluate the query completely through indexes on the files. An important benefit of index-only evaluation is that it works equally efficiently with only unclustered indexes, as only the data entries of the index are used in the queries. Thus, unclustered indexes can be used to speed up certain queries if we recognize that the DBMS will exploit

the data entries of the index are used in the queries. Thus, unclustered indexes can be used to speed up certain queries if we recognize that the DBMS will exploit index-only evaluation. Design Examples Illustrating Clustered Indexes To illustrate the use of a clustered index 011 a range query, consider the following example: SELECT FROM WHERE E.dno Employees E E.age > 40 If we have a H+ tree index on age, we can use it to retrieve only tuples that satisfy the selection E. age> 40. \iVhether such an index is worthwhile depends first of all on the selectivity of the condition. vVhat fraction of the employees are older than 40'1 If virtually everyone is older than 40 1 we gain little by using an index 011 age; a sequential scan of the relation would do almost as well. However, suppose that only 10 percent of the employees are older than 40. Now, is an index useful? The answer depends on whether the index is clustered. If the

294 CHAPTER~ 8 index is unclustered, we could have one page I/O per qualifying employee, and this could be more expensive than a sequential scan, even if only 10 percent of the employees qualify! On the other hand, a clustered B+ tree index on age requires only 10 percent of the l/Os for a sequential scan (ignoring the few l/Os needed to traverse from the root to the first retrieved leaf page and the l/Os for the relevant index leaf pages). As another example, consider the following refinement of the previous query: SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY Kdno, COUNT(*) Employees E E.age> 10 E.dno If a B+ tree index is available on age, we could retrieve tuples using it, sort the retrieved tuples on dna, and so answer the query. However, this may not be a good plan if virtually all employees are more than 10 years old. This plan is especially bad if the index is not clustered. Let us consider whether an index on dna might suit our purposes better. We could use the index to retrieve all

is especially bad if the index is not clustered. Let us consider whether an index on dna might suit our purposes better. We could use the index to retrieve all tuples, grouped by dna, and for each dna count the number of tuples with age> 10. (This strategy can be used with both hash and B+ tree indexes; we only require the tuples to be grouped, not necessarily sorted, by dna.) Again, the efficiency depends crucially on whether the index is clustered. If it is, this plan is likely to be the best if the condition on age is not very selective. (Even if we have a clustered index on age, if the condition on age is not selective, the cost of sorting qualifying tuples on dna is likely to be high.) If the index is not clustered, we could perform one page I/O per tuple in Employees, and this plan would be terrible. Indeed, if the index is not clustered, the optimizer will choose the straightforward plan based on sorting on dna. Therefore, this query suggests that we build

plan would be terrible. Indeed, if the index is not clustered, the optimizer will choose the straightforward plan based on sorting on dna. Therefore, this query suggests that we build a clustered index on dna if the condition on age is not very selective. If the condition is very selective, we should consider building an index (not necessarily clustered) on age instead. Clustering is also important for an index on a search key that does not include a candidate key, that is, an index in which several data entries can have the same key value. To illustrate this point, we present the following query: SELECT E.dno FROM Employees E WHERE E.hobby='Stamps'

## Common Mistakes

Stomge and Indexing If many people collect stamps, retrieving tuples through an unclustered index on hobby can be very inefficient. It may be cheaper to simply scan the relation to retrieve all tuples and to apply the selection on-the-fly to the retrieved tuples. Therefore, if such a query is important, we should consider making the index on hobby a clustered index. On the other hand, if we assume that eid is a key for Employees, and replace the condition E.hobby= 'Stamps' by E. eid=552, we know that at most one Employees tuple will satisfy this selection condition. In this case, there is no advantage to making the index clustered. The next query shows how aggregate operations can influence the choice of indexes: SELECT E.dno, COUNT(*) FROM Employees E GROUP BY E.dno A straightforward plan for this query is to sort Employees on dno to compute the count of employees for each dno. However, if an index-hash or B+ tree--- on dno is available, we can answer this query by scanning only the index. For each dno value, we simply count

each dno. However, if an index-hash or B+ tree--- on dno is available, we can answer this query by scanning only the index. For each dno value, we simply count the number of data entries in the index with this value for the search key. Note that it does not matter whether the index is clustered because we never retrieve tuples of Employees. 8.5.3 Composite Search Keys The search key for an index can contain several fields; such keys are called composite search keys or concatenated keys. As an example, consider a collection of employee records, with fields name, age, and sal, stored in sorted order by name. Figure 8.5 illustrates the difference between a composite index with key (age, sa0, a composite index with key (sal, age), an index with key age, and an index with key sal. All indexes shown in the figure use Alternative (2) for data entries. If the search key is composite, an equality query is one in which each field in the search key is bound to a constant. For example, we can ask

entries. If the search key is composite, an equality query is one in which each field in the search key is bound to a constant. For example, we can ask to retrieve all data entries with age = 20 and sal = 10. The hashed file organization supports only equality queries, since a ha"ih function identifies the bucket containing desired records only if a value is specified for each field in the search key. With respect to a composite key index, in a range query not all fields in the search key are bound to constants. For example, we can ask to retrieve all data entries with age :=0:: 20; this query implies that any value is acceptable for the sal field. As another example of a range query, we can ask to retrieve all data entries with age < 30 and sal> 40.

296 CHAPTEI48 ~I 80 75 name age sal " ~-_.- bob 12 10 cal 11 80 - joe 12 20 ---- sue 13 75 Data Index 75,13 80,11 10,12 <age, sal> ,~..._---! I 11,80 ,,! Index R;:IO ~ __:~i 1 12,20 ~_.1 U~:~, <sal, age> ../ Figure 8.5 Composite Key Indexes Nate that the index cannot help on the query sal > 40, because, intuitively, the index organizes records by age first and then sal. If age is left unspeci- fied, qualifying records could be spread across the entire index. We say that an index matches a selection condition if the index can be used to retrieve just the tuples that satisf:y the condition. For selections of the form condition 1\ ... 1\ condition, we can define when an index matches the selection as 1'01- 10ws:4 For a hash index, a selection matches the index if it includes an equality condition ('field = constant') on every field in the composite search key for the index. For a tree index, a selection matches the index if it includes an equal- ity

condition ('field = constant') on every field in the composite search key for the index. For a tree index, a selection matches the index if it includes an equal- ity or range condition on a prefi.T of the composite search key. (As examples, (age) and (age, sal, department) are prefixes of key (age, sal, depa7'tment) , but (age, department) and (sal, department) are not.) Trade-offs in Choosing Composite Keys A composite key index can support a broader range of queries because it matches more selection conditions. Further, since data entries in a composite index contain more information about the data record (i.e., more fields than a single-attribute index), the opportunities for index-only evaluation strategies are increased. (Recall from Section 8.5.2 that an index-only evaluation does not need to access data records, but finds all required field values in the data entries of indexes.) On the negative side, a composite index must be updated in response to any operation (insert, delete, or update) that modifies any field in the search key. A composite index is Hlso likely to be larger than

must be updated in response to any operation (insert, delete, or update) that modifies any field in the search key. A composite index is Hlso likely to be larger than a singk'-attribute search key 4 For a more general discussion, see Section 14.2.)

## Related Concepts

- [normalization](./normalization.md)
- [create-table](./create-table.md)

---

**Tags:** `database` `design` `erd`
