# MySQL Data Types

🟢 **Difficulty:** Beginner
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 35 minutes

## Overview

Understanding numeric, string, date/time, and large object data types

📖 *Source: Page 260, Page 261, Page 262, Page 263, Page 264, Page 265, Page 266, Page 267, Page 268, Page 269, Page 270*

## Definition

Internet Applications <H1>Barns and Nobble Internet Bookstore</H1> Our inventory: <H3>Science</H3> <B>The Character of Physical Law</B> 225 The HTTP response message has three parts: a status line, several header lines, and the body of the message (which contains the actual object that the client requested). The status line has three fields (analogous to the request line of the HTTP request message): the HTTP version (HTTP/1.1), a status code (200), and an associated server message (OK). Common status codes and associated messages are: • 200 OK: The request succeeded and the object is contained in the body of the response message"; • 400 Bad Request: A generic error code indicating that the request could not be fulfilled by the server. • 404 Not Found: The requested object does not exist on the server. • 505 HTTP Version Not Supported: The HTTP protocol version that the client uses is not supported by the server. (Recall that the HTTP protocol version sent in the client's request.) Our example has three header lines: The date header line indicates the time and date when the HTTP

server. (Recall that the HTTP protocol version sent in the client's request.) Our example has three header lines: The date header line indicates the time and date when the HTTP response was created (not that this is not the object creation time). The Last-Modified header line indicates when the object was created. The Content-Length header line indicates the number of bytes in the object being sent after the last header line. The Content-Type header line indicates that the object in the entity body is HTML text. The client (the Web browser) receives the response message, extracts the HTML file, parses it, and displays it. In doing so, it might find additional URIs in the file, and it then uses the HTTP protocol to retrieve each of these resources, establishing a new connection each time. One important issue is that the HTTP protocol is a stateless protocol. Every message----from, the client to the HTTP server and vice-versa-is self-contained, and the connection established with a request is maintained only until the response message is sent. The protocol provides no mechanism to automatically

to the HTTP server and vice-versa-is self-contained, and the connection established with a request is maintained only until the response message is sent. The protocol provides no mechanism to automatically 'remember' previous interactions between client and server. The stateless nature of the HTTP protocol has a major impact on how Inter- net applications are written. Consider a user who interacts with our exalIlple

226 CHAPTER ,7 bookstore application. Assume that the bookstore permits users to log into the site and then carry out several actions, such as ordering books or changing their address, without logging in again (until the login expires or the user logs out). How do we keep track of whether a user is logged in or not? Since HTTP is stateless, we cannot switch to a different state (say the 'logged in' state) at the protocol level. Instead, for every request that the user (more precisely, his or her Web browser) sends to the server, we must encode any state information required by the application, such as the user's login status. Alternatively, the server-side application code must maintain this state information and look it up on a per-request basis. This issue is explored further in Section 7.7.5. Note that the statelessness of HTTP is a tradeoff between ease of implementa- tion of the HTTP protocol and ease of application development. The designers of HTTP chose to keep the protocol itself simple, and deferred any functionality beyond the request of objects

tion of the HTTP protocol and ease of application development. The designers of HTTP chose to keep the protocol itself simple, and deferred any functionality beyond the request of objects to application layers above the HTTP protocol. 7.3 HTML DOCUMENTS In this section and the next, we focus on introducing HTML and XML. In Section 7.6, we consider how applications can use HTML and XML to create forms that capture user input, communicate with an HTTP server, and convert the results produced by the data management layer into one of these formats. HTML is a simple language used to describe a document. It is also called a markup language because HTML works by augmenting regular text with 'marks' that hold special meaning for a Web browser. Commands in the lan- guage, called tags, consist (usually) of a start tag and an end tag of the form <TAG> and </TAG>, respectively. For example, consider the HTML frag- ment shown in Figure 7.1. It describes a webpage that shows a list of books. The document is enclosed by the tags <HTML> and

For example, consider the HTML frag- ment shown in Figure 7.1. It describes a webpage that shows a list of books. The document is enclosed by the tags <HTML> and </HTML>, marking it as an HTML document. The remainder of the document-enclosed in <BODY> ... </BoDY>-contains information about three books. Data about each book is represented as an unordered list (UL) whose entries are marked with the LI tag. HTML defines the set of valid tags as well 8.'3 the meaning of the tags. :For example, HTML specifies that the tag <TITLE> is a valid tag that denotes the title of the document. As another example, the tag <UL> always denotes an unordered list. Audio, video, and even programs (written in Java, a highly portable language) can be included in HTML documents. vVhen a user retrieves such a document using a suitable browser, images in the document arc displayed, audio and video clips are played, and embedded programs are executed at the uset's machine; the result is a rich multimedia presentation. The e8."ie with which HTML docu-

Internet Applications <HTML> <HEAD> </HEAD> <BODY> <Hl>Barns and Nobble Internet Bookstore</Hl> Our inventory: <H3>Science</H3> <B>The Character of Physical Law</B> <UL> <LI>Author: Richard Feynman</LI> <LI>Published 1980</LI> <Ll>Hardcover</LI> </UL> <H3>Fiction</H3> <B>Waiting for the Mahatma</B> <UL> <LI>Author: R.K. Narayan</LI> <LI>Published 1981</Ll> </UL> <B>The English Teacher</B> <UL> <LI>Author: R.K. Narayan</LI> <LI>Published 1980</LI> <LI>Paperback</LI> </UL> </BODY> </HTML> Figure 7.1 Book Listing in HTML 227 » ments can be created--there are now visual editors that automatically generate HTML----and accessed using Internet browsers has fueled the explosive growth of the Web. 7.4 XML DOCUMENTS In this section, we introduce XML a.'3 a document format, and consider how applications can utilize XML. Managing XML documents in a DBMS poses several new challenges; we discuss this a.'3pect of XML in Chapter 27.

## Explanation

228 CHAPTER l vVhile HTl\.fL can be used to mark up documents for display purposes, it is not adequate to describe the structure of the content for more general applica- tions. For example, we can send the HTML document shown in Figure 7.1 to another application that displays it, but the second application cannot distin- guish the first names of authors from their last names. (The application can try to recover such information by looking at the text inside the tags, but this defeats the purpose of using tags to describe document structure.) Therefore, HTML is unsuitable for the exchange of complex documents containing product specifications or bids, for example. Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language developed to remedy the shortcomings of HTML. In contrast to a fixed set of tags whose meaning is specified by the language (as in HTML), XML allows users to de- fine new collections of tags that can be used to structure any type of data or document the user wishes to transmit. XML is an important bridge between the document-oriented view of

collections of tags that can be used to structure any type of data or document the user wishes to transmit. XML is an important bridge between the document-oriented view of data implicit in HTML and the schema-oriented view of data that is central to a DBMS. It has the potential to make database systems more tightly integrated into Web applications than ever before. XML emerged from the confluence of two technologies, SGML and HTML. The Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) is a metalanguage that allows the definition of data and document interchange languages such as HTML. The SGML standard was published in 1988, and many organizations that rnanage a large number of complex documents have adopted it. Due to its generality, SGML is complex and requires sophisticated programs to harness its full potential. XML was developed to have much of the power of SGML while remaining relatively simple. Nonetheless, XML, like SGML, allows the definition of new document markup languages. Although XML does not prevent a user from designing tags that encode the display of the data in a Web

like SGML, allows the definition of new document markup languages. Although XML does not prevent a user from designing tags that encode the display of the data in a Web browser, there is a style language for XML called Extensible Style Language (XSL). XSL is a standard way of describing how an XML docmnent that adheres to a certain vocabulary of tags should be displayed. 7.4.1 Introduction to XML Vve use the smaJI XML docmnent shown in Figure 7.2 a,s an example. 11II Elements: Elements, also called tags, a.rc the primary building blocks of an XML docmnent. The start of the content of an element ELM is marked with <ELM>, which is called the start tag, and the end of the content end is marked with </ELM>, called the end tag. In our example document.

Internet Applicai'ions 229 The Design Goals ofXML: XML wa.."l developed'startingin 1996 by a working group under guidance of the ';Yorld Wide Web Consortium (W3C) XML Special Interest Group. The design goals for XML included the following: 1. XML should be compatible with SGML. 2. It should be easy to write programs that process XML documents. 3. The design of XML should be formal and concise. the element BOOKLIST encloses all information in the sample document. The element BOOK demarcates all data associated with a single book. XML elements are case sensitive: the element BOOK is different from Book. Elements must be properly nested. Start tags that appear inside the content of other tags must have a corresponding end tag. For example, consider the following XML fragment: <BOOK> <AUTHOR> <FIRSTNAME>Richard</FIRSTNAME> <LASTNAME>Feynluan</LASTNAME> </AUTHOR> </BOOK> The element AUTHOR is completely nested inside the element BOOK, and both the elements LASTNAME and FIRSTNAME are nested inside the element AUTHOR. .. Attributes: An element can have descriptive attributes that provide ad- ditional information about the element. The values of attributes are set inside the start

nested inside the element AUTHOR. .. Attributes: An element can have descriptive attributes that provide ad- ditional information about the element. The values of attributes are set inside the start tag of an element. For example, let ELM denote an element with the attribute att. We can set the value of att to value through the following expression: <ELM att=" value II >. All attribute values must be enclosed in quotes. In Figure 7.2, the element BOOK has two attributes. The attribute GENRE indicates the genre of the book (science or fiction) and the attribute FORMAT indicates whether the book is a hardcover or a paperback. III Entity References: Entities are shortcuts for portions of common text or the content of external files, and we call the usage of an entity in the XML document an entity reference. Wherever an entity reference appears in the document, it is textually replaced by its content. Entity references start with a '&' and end with a '; '. Five predefined entities in XML are placeholders for chara.cters with special meaning in XML. For

by its content. Entity references start with a '&' and end with a '; '. Five predefined entities in XML are placeholders for chara.cters with special meaning in XML. For example, the

230 CHAPTER~7 <?xml version=11.0" encoding="UTF-S Il standalone=llyes ll?> <BOOKLIST> <BOOK GENRE=" Science" FORMAT=" Hardcover" > <AUTHOR> <FIRSTNAME>Richard</FIRSTNAME> <LASTNAME>Feynman</LASTNAME> </AUTHOR> <TITLE>The Character of Physical Law</TITLE> <PUBLISHED>1980</PUBLISHED> </BOOK> <BOOK> GENRE=" Fiction" > <AUTHOR> <FIRSTNAME>R.K.</FIRSTNAME> <LASTNAME>Narayan</LASTNAME> </AUTHOR> <TITLE>Waiting for the Mahatma</TITLE> <PUBLISHED>1981</PUBLISHED> </BOOK> <BOOK GENRE=" Fiction" > <AUTHOR> <FIRSTNAME>R.K.</FIRSTNAME> <LASTNAME>Narayan</LASTNAME> </AUTHOR> <TITLE>The English Teacher</TITLE> <PUBLISHED>1980</PUBLISHED> </BOOK> </BOOKLIST> Figure 7.2 Book Information in XML < character that marks the beginning of an XML command is reserved and has to be represented by the entity It. The other four reserved characters are &, >, ", and '; they are represented by the entities amp, gt, quot, and apos. For example, the text '1 < 5' has to be encoded in an XML document &'3 follows: &apos; 1&1t ;5&apos;. We can also use entities to insert arbitrary Unicode characters into the text. Unicode is a standard for character representations, similar to ASCII. For example, we can display the Japanese Hiragana character a using the entity reference &#x3042. • Comments: We can insert comments anywhere in an XML document. Comments start with <! - and end with

display the Japanese Hiragana character a using the entity reference &#x3042. • Comments: We can insert comments anywhere in an XML document. Comments start with <! - and end with ->. Comments can contain arbi- trary text except the string --.

Internet Applications • Document Type Declarations (DTDs): In XML, we can define our own markup language. A DTD is a set of rules that allows us to specify our own set of elements, attributes, and entities. Thus, a DTD is basically a grammar that indicates what tags are allowed, in what order they can appear, and how they can be nested. We discuss DTDs in detail in the next section. We call an XML document well-formed if it has no associated DTD but follows these structural guidelines: • The document starts with an XML declaration. An example of an XML declaration is the first line of the XML document shown in Figure 7.2. • A root element contains all the other elements. In our example, the root element is the element BOOKLIST. • All elements must be properly nested. This requirement states that start and end tags of an element must appear within the same enclosing element. 7.4.2 XML DTDs A DTD is a set of rules that allows us to specify our own set of elements, attributes, and entities.

must appear within the same enclosing element. 7.4.2 XML DTDs A DTD is a set of rules that allows us to specify our own set of elements, attributes, and entities. A DTD specifies which elements we can use and con- straints on these elements, for example, how elements can be nested and where elements can appear in the document. We call a document valid if a DTD is associated with it and the document is structured according to the rules set by the DTD. In the remainder of this section, we use the example DTD shown in Figure 7.3 to illustrate how to construct DTDs. <!DOCTYPE BOOKLIST [ <! ELEMENT BOOKLIST (BOOK)*> <! ELEMENT BOOK (AUTHOR,TITLE,PUBLISHED?» <!ELEMENT AUTHOR (FIRSTNAME,LASTNAME» <! ELEMENT FIRSTNAME (#PCDATA» <! ELEMENT LASTNAME (#PCDATA» <! ELEMENT TITLE (#PCDATA» <! ELEMENT PUBLISHED (#PCDATA» <! ATTLIST BOOK GENRE (ScienceIFiction) #REQUIRED> <!ATTLIST BOOK FORMAT (PaperbackIHardcover) "Paperback"> ]> Figure 7.3 Bookstore XML DTD

## Examples

232 CHAPTER .;{ A DTD is enclosed in <! DOCTYPE name [DTDdeclarationJ >, where name is the name of the outermost enclosing tag, and DTDdeclaration is the text of the rules of the DTD. The DTD starts with the outermost element---the root elenwnt--which is BOOKLIST in our example. Consider the next rule: <!ELEMENT BOOKLIST (BOOK)*> This rule tells us that the element BOOKLIST consists of zero or more BOOK elements. The * after BOOK indicates how many BOOK elements can appear inside the BOOKLIST element. A * denotes zero or more occurrences, a + denotes one or more occurrences, and a? denotes zero or one occurrence. For example, if we want to ensure that a BOOKLIST has at least one book, we could change the rule as follows: <!ELEMENT BOOKLIST (BOOK)+> Let us look at the next rule: <!ELEMENT BOOK (AUTHOR,TITLE,PUBLISHED?» This rule states that a BOOK element contains a AUTHOR element, a TITLE ele- ment, and an optional PUBLISHED clement. Note the use of the? to indicate that the information is optional by having zero or one occurrence of

AUTHOR element, a TITLE ele- ment, and an optional PUBLISHED clement. Note the use of the? to indicate that the information is optional by having zero or one occurrence of the element. Let us move ahead to the following rule: < !ELEMENT LASTNAME (#PCDATA» Until now we considered only elements that contained other elements. This rule states that LASTNAME is an element that does not contain other elements, but contains actual text. Elements that only contain other elements are said to have element content, whereas elements that also contain #PCDATA are ::laid to have mixed content. In general, an element type declaration has the following structure: < !ELEMENT (contentType» Five possible content types are: III Other elements. II The special syrnbol #PCDATA, which indicates (parsed) character data. II The special symbol EMPTY, which indicates that the element has no content. Elements that have no content are not required to have an end tag. 11II The special symbol ANY, which indicates that any content is permitted. This content should be avoided whenever possible ::lince it disables all check- ing of the

an end tag. 11II The special symbol ANY, which indicates that any content is permitted. This content should be avoided whenever possible ::lince it disables all check- ing of the document structure inside the element.

Internet Apphcat'ions 2~3 • A regular expression constructed from the preceding four choices. A regular expression is one of the following: - expL exp2, exp3: A list of regular expressions. - exp*: An optional expression (zero or more occurrences). - exp?: An optional expression (zero or one occurrences). - exp+: A mandatory expression (one or more occurrences). - expl I exp2: expl or exp2. Attributes of elements are declared outside the element. For example, consider the following attribute declaration from Figure 7.3: <! ATTLIST BOOK GENRE (ScienceIFiction) #REQUIRED» This XML DTD fragment specifies the attribute GENRE, which is an attribute of the element BOOK. The attribute can take two values: Science or Fiction. Each BOOK element must be described in its start tag by a GENRE attribute since the attribute is required as indicated by #REQUIRED. Let us look at the general structure of a DTD attribute declaration: <! ATTLIST elementName (attName attType default)+> The keyword ATTLIST indicates the beginning of an attribute declaration. The string elementName is the name of the element with which the following at- tribute dcfinition

elementName (attName attType default)+> The keyword ATTLIST indicates the beginning of an attribute declaration. The string elementName is the name of the element with which the following at- tribute dcfinition is associated. What follows is the declaration of one or more attributes. Each attribute has a name, as indicated by attName, and a type, as indicated by attType. XML defines several possible types for an attribute. We discuss only string types and enumerated types here. An attribute of type string can take any string as a value. We can declare such an attribute by setting its type field to CDATA. F'or example, we can declare a third attribute of type string of the elernent BOOK a.s follows: <!ATTLIST BOOK edition CDATA "1"> If an attribute has an enumerated type, we list all its possible values in the attribute declaration. In our example, the itttribute GENRE is an enumerated attribute type; its possible attribute values are 'Science' and 'Fiction'. The last part 'Of an attribute declaration is called its default specification. The DTD in Figure 7.:3 shows two different default specifications:

its possible attribute values are 'Science' and 'Fiction'. The last part 'Of an attribute declaration is called its default specification. The DTD in Figure 7.:3 shows two different default specifications: #REQUIRED itnd the string 'Pitperback'. The default specification #REQUIRED indicates that the attribute is required and whenever its associated element itppears some- where in the XML document ~t value for the attribute must be specified. The debult specification indicated by the string 'Paperback' indicates that the at- tribute is not required; whenever its a.')sociated element itppears without setting

## Common Mistakes

234 <?xml version=11.0" encoding=IUTF-8" standalone="no"?> <! DOCTYPE BOOKLIST SYSTEM" books.dtd" > <BOOKLIST> <BOOK GENRE=" Science" FORMAT=" Hardcover" > <AUTHOR> Figure 7.4 Book Information in XML XML Schema: The DTD mechanism has several limitations, in spite of its widespread use. For example, elements and attributes cannot be as- signed types in a flexible way, and elements are always ordered, even if the application does not require this. XML Schema is a new W3C proposal that provides a more powerful way to describe document structure than DTDs; it is a superset of DTDs, allowing legacy data to be handled eas- ily. An interesting aspect is that it supports uniqueness and foreign key constraints. a value for the attribute, the attribute automatically takes the value 'Paper- back'. For example, we can make the attribute value 'Science' the default value for the GENRE attribute as follows: <! ATTLIST BOOK GENRE (ScienceIFiction) "Science" > In our bookstore example, the XML document with a reference to the DTD is shown in Figure 7.4. 7.4.3 Domain-Specific DTDs Recently, DTDs have been developed for several specialized domains-including a

our bookstore example, the XML document with a reference to the DTD is shown in Figure 7.4. 7.4.3 Domain-Specific DTDs Recently, DTDs have been developed for several specialized domains-including a wide range of commercial, engineering, financial, industrial, and scientific domains----and a lot of the excitement about XML h3...<; its origins in the belief that more and more standardized DTDs will be developed. Standardized DTDs would enable seamless data exchange among heterogeneous sources, a problem solved today either by implementing specialized protocols such as Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) or by implementing ad hoc solutions. Even in an environment where all XML data is valid, it is not possible to straightforwardly integrate several XML documents by matching elements in their DTDs, because even when two elements have identical names in two different DTDs, the meaning of the elements could be completely different. If both documents use a single, standard DTD, we avoid this problem. The

Internet Applications 235 development of standardized DTDs is more a social process than a research problem, since the major players in a given domain or industry segment have to collaborate. For example, the mathematical markup language (MathML) has been developed for encoding mathematical material on the Web. There are two types of MathML elements. The 28 presentation elements describe the lay- out structure of a document; examples are the mrow element, which indicates a horizontal row of characters, and the msup element, which indicates a base and a subscript. The 75 content elements describe mathematical concepts. An ex- ample is the plus element, which denotes the addition operator. (A third type of element, the math element, is used to pass parameters to the MathML pro- cessor.) MathML allows us to encode mathematical objects in both notations since the requirements of the user of the objects might be different. Content elements encode the precise mathematical meaning of an object without ambi- guity, and the description can be used by applications such as computer algebra systems. On the other hand, good notation

encode the precise mathematical meaning of an object without ambi- guity, and the description can be used by applications such as computer algebra systems. On the other hand, good notation can suggest the logical structure to a human and emphasize key aspects of an object; presentation elements allow us to describe mathematical objects at this level. For example, consider the following simple equation: x 2 - 4x - 32 = 0 Using presentation elements, the equation is represented as follows: <mrow> <mrow> <msup><mi>x</mi><mn>2</mn></msup> <mo>-</mo> <mrow><mn>4</mn> <mo>&invisibletimes;</mo> <mi>x</mi> </mrow> <mo>-</ mo><mn>32</ mn> </mrow><mo>=</mo><mn>O</nm> </mrow> Using content elements, the equation is described as follows: <reln><eq/> <apply> <minus/> <apply> <power/> <ci>x</ci> <cn>2</cn> </apply> <apply> <times/> <cn>4</cn> <ci>x</ci> </apply> <cn>32</cn>

## Related Concepts

- [create-table](./create-table.md)

---

**Tags:** `mysql` `data-types` `schema`
