# The DELETE Statement

🟢 **Difficulty:** Beginner
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 20 minutes

## Overview

Removing rows from a table using DELETE with WHERE clause

📖 *Source: Page 171, Page 172, Page 173, Page 174, Page 175, Page 176*

## Definition

136 CHAPTER fj convenient shorthand: \eVe can simply write SELECT *. This notation is useful for interactive querying, but it is poor style for queries that are intended to be reused and maintained because the schema of the result is not clear from the query itself; we have to refer to the schema of the underlying Sailors ta.ble. As these two examples illustrate, the SELECT clause is actually used to do pm- jection, whereas selections in the relational algebra sense are expressed using the WHERE clause! This mismatch between the naming of the selection and pro- jection operators in relational algebra and the syntax of SQL is an unfortunate historical accident. We now consider the syntax of a basic SQL query in more detail. • The from-list in the FROM clause is a list of table names. A table name can be followed by a range variable; a range variable is particularly useful when the same table name appears more than once in the from-list. • The select-list is a list of (expressions involving) column names of tables named in

is particularly useful when the same table name appears more than once in the from-list. • The select-list is a list of (expressions involving) column names of tables named in the from-list. Column names can be prefixed by a range variable. • The qualification in the WHERE clause is a boolean combination (i.e., an expression using the logical connectives AND, OR, and NOT) of conditions of the form expression op expression, where op is one of the comparison operators {<, <=, =, <>, >=, >}.2 An expression is a column name, a constant, or an (arithmetic or string) expression. • The DISTINCT keyword is optional. It indicates that the table computed as an answer to this query should not contain duplicates, that is, two copies of the same row. The default is that duplicates are not eliminated. Although the preceding rules describe (informally) the syntax of a basic SQL query, they do not tell us the meaning of a query. The answer to a query is itself a relation which is a rnultisef of rows in SQL!--whose contents can be

they do not tell us the meaning of a query. The answer to a query is itself a relation which is a rnultisef of rows in SQL!--whose contents can be understood by considering the following conceptual evaluation strategy: 1. Cmnpute the cross-product of the tables in the from-list. 2. Delete rows in the cross-product that fail the qualification conditions. 3. Delete all columns that do not appear in the select-list. 4. If DISTINCT is specified, eliminate duplicate rows. 2ExpressiollS with NOT can always be replaced by equivalent expressions without NOT given the set of comparison operators just listed.

SCJL: Queries, ConstTaints, TriggeTs 137 ~ This straightforward conceptual evaluation strategy makes explicit the rows that must be present in the answer to the query. However, it is likely to be quite inefficient. We will consider how a DB:MS actually evaluates queries in later chapters; for now, our purpose is simply to explain the meaning of a query. \Ve illustrate the conceptual evaluation strategy using the following query': (Q1) Find the names of sailors 'Who have reseTved boat number 103. It can be expressed in SQL as follows. SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S, Reserves R WHERE S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid=103 Let us compute the answer to this query on the instances R3 of Reserves and 84 of Sailors shown in Figures 5.6 and 5.7, since the computation on our usual example instances (R2 and 83) would be unnecessarily tedious. ~day I 22 I 101 10/10/96 I 58 I 103 11/12/96 Figure 5.6 Instance R3 of Reserves ~ sname I Tating I age I 22 dustin 7 45.0 31 lubber 8 55.5 58 rusty 10 35.0 Figure 5.7 Instance 54

11/12/96 Figure 5.6 Instance R3 of Reserves ~ sname I Tating I age I 22 dustin 7 45.0 31 lubber 8 55.5 58 rusty 10 35.0 Figure 5.7 Instance 54 of Sailors The first step is to construct the cross-product 84 x R3, which is shown in Figure 5.8. ~ sname·j Tating·I···age~day 22 dustin 7 45.0 22 101 10/10/96 22 dustin 7 45.0 58 103 11/12/96 31 lubber 8 55.5 22 101 10/10/96 31 lubber 8 --- 55.5 58 103 11/12/96 58 rusty 10 3.5.0 22 101 10/10/96 58 rusty 10 35.0 58 103 11/12/96 Figure 5.8 84 x RS The second step is to apply the qualification S./rid = R.sid AND R.bid=103. (Note that the first part of this qualification requires a join operation.) This step eliminates all but the last row from the instance shown in Figure 5.8. The third step is to eliminate unwanted columns; only sname appears in the SELECT clause. This step leaves us with the result shown in Figure .5.9, which is a table with a single column and, a.c; it happens, just one

appears in the SELECT clause. This step leaves us with the result shown in Figure .5.9, which is a table with a single column and, a.c; it happens, just one row.

## Syntax

138 ! sna'me! [I1lStL] Figure 5.9 Answer to Query Ql 011 R:l and 84 5.2.1 Examples of Basic SQL Queries CHAPTER 15 vVe now present several example queries, many of which were expressed earlier in relational algebra and calculus (Chapter 4). Our first example illustrates that the use of range variables is optional, unless they are needed to resolve an ambiguity. Query Ql, which we discussed in the previous section, can also be expressed as follows: SELECT sname FROM Sailors 5, Reserves R WHERE S.sid = R.sid AND bid=103 Only the occurrences of sid have to be qualified, since this column appears in both the Sailors and Reserves tables. An equivalent way to write this query is: SELECT SHame FROM Sailors, Reserves WHERE Sailors.sid = Reserves.sid AND bid=103 This query shows that table names can be used implicitly as row variables. Range variables need to be introduced explicitly only when the FROM clause contains more than one occurrence of a relation. 3 However, we recommend the explicit use of range variables and full qualification of all occurrences of columns with

the FROM clause contains more than one occurrence of a relation. 3 However, we recommend the explicit use of range variables and full qualification of all occurrences of columns with a range variable to improve the readability of your queries. We will follow this convention in all our examples. (Q16) Find the sids of sa'iloTs who have TeseTved a Ted boat. SELECT FROM WHERE R.sid Boats B, Reserves R B.bid = R.bid AND 8.color = 'red' This query contains a join of two tables, followed by a selection on the color of boats. vVe can think of 13 and R &<; rows in the corresponding tables that :~The table name cannot be used aii an implicit. range variable once a range variable is introduced for t.he relation.

## Examples

SQL: QUEeries, Constraints, Triggers :prove' that a sailor with sid R.sid reserved a reel boat B.bid. On our example instances R2 and 83 (Figures 5.1 and 5.2), the answer consists of the Bids 22, 31, and 64. If we want the names of sailors in the result, we must also consider the Sailors relation, since Reserves does not contain this information, as the next example illustrates. (Q2) Find the names of sailors 'Who have TeseTved a Ted boat. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S, Reserves R, Boats 13 S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = 13.bid AND B.color = 'red' This query contains a join of three tables followed by a selection on the color of boats. The join with Sailors allows us to find the name of the sailor who, according to Reserves tuple R, has reserved a red boat described by tuple 13. (QS) Find the coloTS of boats reseTved by LubbeT. SELECT 13.color FROM Sailors S, Reserves R, Boats 13 WHERE S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = B.bid AND S.sname = 'Lubber' This query is very similar to

reseTved by LubbeT. SELECT 13.color FROM Sailors S, Reserves R, Boats 13 WHERE S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = B.bid AND S.sname = 'Lubber' This query is very similar to the previous one. Note that in general there may be more than one sailor called Lubber (since sname is not a key for Sailors); this query is still correct in that it will return the colors of boats reserved by some Lubber, if there are several sailors called Lubber. (Q4) Find the names of sa'iloTs who have Teserved at least one boat. SELECT S.sname FROM Sailors S, Reserves R WHERE S.sid = R.sid The join of Sailors and Reserves ensures that for each selected sname, the sailor has made some reservation. (If a sailor has not made a reservation, the second step in the conceptual evaluation strategy would eliminate all rows in the cross-product that involve this sailor.) 5.2.2 Expressions and Strings in the SELECT Command SQL supports a more general version of the select-list than just a list of colu1nn8. Each item in a select-list can be of the

and Strings in the SELECT Command SQL supports a more general version of the select-list than just a list of colu1nn8. Each item in a select-list can be of the form e:l:pTcssion AS col- 'wnrLno:rne, where c:rprcs.sion is any arithmetic or string expression over column

140 CHAPTERf) names (possibly prefixed by range variables) and constants, and colurnnswrne is a ne"v name for this column in the output of the query. It can also contain aggregates such as smn and count, which we will discuss in Section 5.5. The SQL standard also includes expressions over date and time values, which we will not discuss. Although not part of the SQL standard, many implementations also support the use of built-in functions such as sqrt, sin, and rnod. (Q17) Compute increments for the mtings of peTsons who have sailed two dif- ferent boats on the same day. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname, S.rating+1 AS rating Sailors S, Reserves R1, Reserves R2 S.sid = R1.sid AND S.sid = R2.sid AND R1.day = R2.day AND R1.bid <> R2.bid Also, each item in a qualification can be as general as expTession1 = expression2. SELECT S1.sname AS name1, S2.sname AS name2 FROM Sailors Sl, Sailors S2 WHERE 2*S1.rating = S2.rating-1 For string comparisons, we can use the comparison operators (=, <, >, etc.) with the ordering of strings determined alphabetically as usual. If

Sl, Sailors S2 WHERE 2*S1.rating = S2.rating-1 For string comparisons, we can use the comparison operators (=, <, >, etc.) with the ordering of strings determined alphabetically as usual. If we need to sort strings by an order other than alphabetical (e.g., sort strings denoting month names in the calendar order January, February, March, etc.), SQL sup- ports a general concept of a collation, or sort order, for a character set. A collation allows the user to specify which characters are 'less than' which others and provides great flexibility in string manipulation. In addition, SQL provides support for pattern matching through the LIKE op- erator, along with the use of the wild-card symbols % (which stands for zero or more arbitrary characters) and ~ (which stands for exactly one, arbitrary, character). Thus, '_AB%' denotes a pattern matching every string that con- tains at lea.'3t three characters, with the second and third characters being A and B respectively. Note that unlike the other comparison operators, blanks can be significant for the LIKE operator (depending on the collation for the underlying character

third characters being A and B respectively. Note that unlike the other comparison operators, blanks can be significant for the LIKE operator (depending on the collation for the underlying character set). Thus, 'Jeff' = 'Jeff' is true while 'Jeff'LIKE 'Jeff , is false. An example of the use of LIKE in a query is given below. (Q18) Find the ages of sailors wh08e name begins and ends with B and has at least three chamcters. SELECT S.age

## Common Mistakes

SQL: Q'Il,e'rie8, Constraints, TTiggeTs 141 $ r---'-~~-~:~;- Expre~~~'~-:~'-'~:' '~Q'~'~""~,~flecting the incr~~~~~~~mpo~~:l~ceof I I text data, SQL:1999 includes a more powerful version of theLIKE operator i i called SIMILAR. This operator allows a rich set of regular expressions to be I I used as patterns while searching text. The regular expressions are similar t~ I those sUPPo.rted by the Unix operating systenifor string searches, although' the syntax is a little different. -- - . ••••._m. .-.-.-.-.-....•--..-----........ .-••••••••••••.•.•••••••....-- ..- ----.-- -----..-- ..- ------------ ---------- -.••..•.---•••••.••.•.•••••••••..•.•.••••••.••- ••••.....•- ••••.'.-""-'-. J ' . Relational Algebra and SQL: The set operations of SQL are available in relational algebra. The main difference, of course, is that they are multiset operations in SQL, since tables are multisets of tuples. FROM WHERE Sailors S S.sname LIKE 'B.%B' The only such sailor is Bob, and his age is 63.5. 5.3 UNION, INTERSECT, AND EXCEPT SQL provides three set-manipulation constructs that extend the basic query form presented earlier. Since the answer to a query is a multiset of rows, it is natural to consider the use of operations such as union,

extend the basic query form presented earlier. Since the answer to a query is a multiset of rows, it is natural to consider the use of operations such as union, intersection, and differ- ence. SQL supports these operations under the names UNION, INTERSECT, and EXCEPT. 4 SQL also provides other set operations: IN (to check if an element is in a given set), op ANY, op ALL (to compare a value with the elements in a given set, using comparison operator op), and EXISTS (to check if a set is empty). IN and EXISTS can be prefixed by NOT, with the obvious modification to their meaning. We cover UNION, INTERSECT, and EXCEPT in this section, and the other operations in Section 5.4. Consider the following query: (Q5) Find the names of sailors who have reserved a red 01' a green boat. SELECT FROM WHERE S.sname Sailors S, Reserves R, Boats B S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = B.bid AND (B.color = 'red' OR B.color = 'green') .. _---- 4Note that although the SQL standard includes these operations, many systems currently

B S.sid = R.sid AND R.bid = B.bid AND (B.color = 'red' OR B.color = 'green') .. _---- 4Note that although the SQL standard includes these operations, many systems currently support only UNION. Also. many systems recognize the keyword MINUS for EXCEPT.

## Related Concepts

- [insert-statement](./insert-statement.md)
- [update-statement](./update-statement.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `delete` `dml`
