# The GROUP BY Clause

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 25 minutes

## Overview

Grouping rows for aggregate calculations

📖 *Source: Page 189, Page 190, Page 191, Page 192, Page 193, Page 194, Page 195, Page 196*

## Definition

154 CHAPTEFt,~5 Relationa~ Algebra and SQL: ~~~~:egation is a fUIl~~~:·mental operati(~:l-'-l that canIlot be expressed in relational algebra. Similarly, SQL'8 grouping I construct cannot be expressed in algebra. I L..- ._. .....__ . I a rating of 10. The use of ANY intuitively corresponds to the use of MIN, instead of MAX, in the previous query. 5.5.1 The GROUP BY and HAVING Clauses Thus far, we have applied aggregate operations to all (qualifying) rows in a relation. Often we want to apply aggregate operations to each of a number of groups of rows in a relation, where the number of groups depends on the relation instance (i.e., is not known in advance). For example, consider the following query. (Q31) Find the age of the youngest sailor for each rating level. If we know that ratings are integers in the range 1 to la, we could write 10 queries of the form: SELECT MIN (S.age) FROM Sailors S WHERE S.rating = i where i = 1,2, ... ,10. vVriting 10 such queries is tedious. More important, we may not know what

form: SELECT MIN (S.age) FROM Sailors S WHERE S.rating = i where i = 1,2, ... ,10. vVriting 10 such queries is tedious. More important, we may not know what rating levels exist in advance. To write such queries, we need a major extension to the basic SQL query form, namely, the GROUP BY clause. In fact, the extension also includes an optional HAVING clause that can be used to specify qualificatioIls over groups (for example, we may be interested only in rating levels> 6. The general form of an SQL query with these extensions is: SELECT [ DISTINCT] select-list FROM from-list WHERE 'qualification GROUP BY grouping-list HAVING group-qualification Using the GROUP BY clause, we can write Q:n a.s follows: SELECT S.rating, MIN (S.age)

S(JL: queries. Constraints. Triggers FROM Sailors S GROUP BY S.rating Let us consider some important points concerning the new clauses: II The select-list in the SELECT clause consists of (1) a list of column names and (2) a list of terms having the form aggop ( column-name) AS new- name. vVe already saw AS used to rename output columns. Columns that are the result of aggregate operators do not already have a column name, and therefore giving the column a name with AS is especially useful. Every column that appears in (1) must also appear in grouping-list. The reason is that each row in the result of the query corresponds to one gmup, which is a collection of rows that agree on the values of columns in grouping- list. In general, if a column appears in list (1), but not in grouping-list, there can be multiple rows within a group that have different values in this column, and it is not clear what value should be assigned to this column in an answer row. We can sometimes use primary key

that have different values in this column, and it is not clear what value should be assigned to this column in an answer row. We can sometimes use primary key information to verify that a column has a unique value in all rows within each group. For example, if the grouping-list contains the primary key of a table in the from-list, every column of that table has a unique value within each group. In SQL:1999, such columns are also allowed to appear in part (1) of the select-list. II The expressions appearing in the group-qualification in the HAVING clause must have a single value per group. The intuition is that the HAVING clause determines whether an answer row is to be generated for a given group. To satisfy this requirement in SQL-92, a column appearing in the group- qualification must appear a'3 the argument to an aggregation operator, or it must also appear in grouping-list. In SQL:1999, two new set functions have been introduced that allow us to check whether every or any row in a group satisfies a condition;

must also appear in grouping-list. In SQL:1999, two new set functions have been introduced that allow us to check whether every or any row in a group satisfies a condition; this allows us to use conditions similar to those in a WHERE clause. III If GROUP BY is omitted, the entire table is regarded as a single group. vVe explain the semantics of such a query through an example. (QS2) Find the age of the youngest sa'ilor who is eligible to vote (i.e., is at least 18 years old) for each rating level with at least h.uo such sailors. SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY HAVING S.rating, MIN (S.age) AS minage Sailors S S.age >= 18 S.rating COUNT (*) > 1

## Syntax

156 CHAPTERl,5 vVe will evaluate this query on instance 83 of Sailors, reproduced in Figure 5.10 for convenience. The instance of Sailors on which this query is to be evaluated is shown in Figure 5.10. Extending the conceptual evaluation strategy presented in Section 5.2, we proceed as follows. The first step is to construct the cross- product of tables in the from-list. Because the only relation in the from-list in Query Q32 is Sailors, the result is just the instance shown in Figure 5.10. 22 Dustin 7 45.0 29 Brutus 1 33.0 31 Lubber 8 55.5 32 Andy 8 25.5 58 Rusty 10 35.0 64 Horatio 7 35.0 71 Zorba 10 16.0 74 Horatio 9 35.0 85 Art 3 25.5 95 Bob 3 63.5 96 Frodo 3 25.5 Figure 5.10 Instance 53 of Sailors The second step is to apply the qualification in the WHERE clause, S. age >= 18. This step eliminates the row (71, zorba, 10, 16). The third step is to eliminate unwanted columns. Only columns mentioned in the SELECT clause, the GROUP BY clause, or the

This step eliminates the row (71, zorba, 10, 16). The third step is to eliminate unwanted columns. Only columns mentioned in the SELECT clause, the GROUP BY clause, or the HAVING clause are necessary, which means we can eliminate sid and sname in our example. The result is shown in Figure 5.11. Observe that there are two identical rows with rating 3 and age 25.5-SQL does not eliminate duplicates except when required to do so by use of the DISTINCT keyword! The number of copies of a row in the intermediate table of Figure 5.11 is determined by the number of rows in the original table that had these values in the projected columns. The fourth step is to sort the table according to the GROUP BY clause to identify the groups. The result of this step is shown in Figure 5.12. The fifth step ,-is to apply the group-qualification in the HAVING clause, that is, the condition COUNT (*) > 1. This step eliminates the groups with rating equal to 1, 9, and 10. Observe that the order in

in the HAVING clause, that is, the condition COUNT (*) > 1. This step eliminates the groups with rating equal to 1, 9, and 10. Observe that the order in which the WHERE and GROUP BY clauses are considered is significant: If the WHERE clause were not consid- ered first, the group with rating=10 would have met the group-qualification in the HAVING clause. The sixth step is to generate one answer row for each remaining group. The answer row corresponding to a group consists of a subset

SqL: queries, Constraints, Triggers 3 25.5 3 25.5 3 63.5 55.5 25.5 35.0 35.0 I 10 ~~tl?l (J;fJ6; 11 I 33.0 .f'(Lf'tTbf} iigge····· .. . .... 7 45.0 1 33.0 8 55.5 8 25.5 10 35.0 7 35.0 9 35.0 3 25.5 3 63.5 3 25.5 Figure 5.11 After Evaluation Step 3 Figure 5.12 After Evaluation Step 4 of the grouping columns, plus one or more columns generated by applying an aggregation operator. In our example, each answer row has a rating column and a minage column, which is computed by applying MIN to the values in the age column of the corresponding group. The result of this step is shown in Figure 5.13. I rating I minage I 3 25.5 7 35.0 8 25.5 Figure 5.13 Final Result in Sample Evaluation If the query contains DISTINCT in the SELECT clause, duplicates are eliminated in an additional, and final, step. SQL:1999 ha.s introduced two new set functions, EVERY and ANY. To illustrate these functions, we can replace the HAVING clause in our example by HAVING COUNT (*) > 1 AND

SQL:1999 ha.s introduced two new set functions, EVERY and ANY. To illustrate these functions, we can replace the HAVING clause in our example by HAVING COUNT (*) > 1 AND EVERY ( S.age <= 60 ) The fifth step of the conceptual evaluation is the one affected by the change in the HAVING clause. Consider the result of the fourth step, shown in Figure 5.12. The EVERY keyword requires that every row in a group must satisfy the attached condition to meet the group-qualification. The group for rat'ing 3 does meet this criterion and is dropped; the result is shown in Figure 5.14.

## Examples

158 CHAPTER. 5 SQL:1999 Extensions: Two new set functions, EVERY and ANY, have been added. vVhen they are used in the HAVING clause, the basic intuition that the clause specifies a condition to be satisfied by each group, taken as a whole, remains unchanged. However, the condition can now involve tests on individual tuples in the group, whereas it previously relied exclusively on aggregate functions over the group of tuples. It is worth contrasting the preceding query with the following query, in which the condition on age is in the WHERE clause instead of the HAVING clause: SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY HAVING S.rating, MIN (S.age) AS minage Sailors S S.age >= 18 AND S.age <= 60 S.rating COUNT (*) > 1 Now, the result after the third step of conceptual evaluation no longer contains the row with age 63.5. Nonetheless, the group for rating 3 satisfies the condition COUNT (*) > 1, since it still has two rows, and meets the group-qualification applied in the fifth step. The final result for this query is shown in Figure 5.15. 3

(*) > 1, since it still has two rows, and meets the group-qualification applied in the fifth step. The final result for this query is shown in Figure 5.15. 3 25.5 7 45.0 8 55.5 I rating I minage I 55.5 rating I minage ~ 1 45 . 0 Figure 5.14 Final Result of EVERY Query Figure 5.15 Result of Alternative Query 5.5.2 More Examples of Aggregate Queries (Q33) FOT each red boat; find the number of reservations for this boat. SELECT B.bid, COUNT (*) AS reservationcount FROM Boats B, Reserves R WHERE R.bid = B.bid AND B.color = 'red' GROUP BY B.bid On instances B1 and R2, the answer to this query contains the two tuples (102, 3) and (104, 2). Observe that this version of the preceding query is illegal:

SCdL: (J'ueries, Constraints. IhggeT8 SELECT B.bicl, COUNT (*) AS reservationcount FROM Boats B, Reserves R WHERE R.bid = B.bid GROUP BY B.bid HAVING B.color = 'red' lijj9 Even though the gToup-qualification B.coloT = 'Ted'is single-valued per group, since the grouping attribute bid is a key for Boats (and therefore determines coloT) , SQL disallows this query.6 Only columns that appear in the GROUP BY clause can appear in the HAVING clause, unless they appear as arguments to an aggregate operator in the HAVING clause. (Q34) Find the avemge age of sailoTs fOT each mting level that has at least two sailoTs. SELECT FROM GROUP BY HAVING S.rating, AVG (S.age) AS avgage Sailors S S.rating COUNT (*) > 1 After identifying groups based on mting, we retain only groups with at least two sailors. The answer to this query on instance 83 is shown in Figure 5.16. I mting I avgage I 3 44.5 7 40.0 8 40.5 10 25.5 Figure 5.16 Q34 Answer I mting I avgage I 3 45.5 7 40.0 8 40.5 10 35.0 Figure 5.17 Q35 Answer

I 3 44.5 7 40.0 8 40.5 10 25.5 Figure 5.16 Q34 Answer I mting I avgage I 3 45.5 7 40.0 8 40.5 10 35.0 Figure 5.17 Q35 Answer I··rating I av.qage] 3 45.5 7 40.0 8 40.5 Figure 5.18 Q:36 Answer The following alternative formulation of Query Q34 illustrates that the HAVING clause can have a nested subquery, just like the WHERE clause. Note that we can use S. mtiTLg inside the nested subquery in the HAVING clause because it has a single value for the current group of sailors: SELECT FROM GROUP BY HAVING S.rating, AVG ( S.age ) AS avgage Sailors S S.rating 1 < ( SELECT COUNT (*) FROM Sailors S2 WHERE S.rating = S2.Hl,ting ) 6This query can be ea..'iily rewritten to be legal in SQL: 1999 using EVERY in the HAVING clause.

160 CHAPTER .;5 (Q35) Find the average age of sailors 'Who aTe of voting age (i.e.~ at least 18 year8 old) for each 'rating level that has at least two sailors. SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY HAVING S.rating, AVG ( S.age ) AS avgage Sailors S S. age >= 18 S.rating 1 < ( SELECT COUNT (*) FROM Sailors S2 WHERE S.rating = S2.rating ) In this variant of Query Q34, we first remove tuples with age <= 18 and group the remaining tuples by rating. For each group, the subquery in the HAVING clause computes the number of tuples in Sailors (without applying the selection age <= 18) with the same rating value as the current group. If a group has less than two sailors, it is discarded. For each remaining group, we output the average age. The answer to this query on instance 53 is shown in Figure 5.17. Note that the answer is very similar to the answer for Q34, with the only difference being that for the group with rating 10, we now ignore the sailor

5.17. Note that the answer is very similar to the answer for Q34, with the only difference being that for the group with rating 10, we now ignore the sailor with age 16 while computing the average. (Q36) Find the average age oj sailors who aTe of voting age (i.e., at least 18 yeaTs old) JOT each rating level that has at least two such sailors. SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY HAVING S.rating, AVG ( S.age ) AS avgage Sailors S S. age> 18 S.rating 1 < ( SELECT COUNT (*) FROM Sailors S2 WHERE S.rating = S2.rating AND S2.age >= 18 ) This formulation of the query reflects its similarity to Q35. The answer to Q36 on instance 53 is shown in Figure 5.18. It differs from the answer to Q35 in that there is no tuple for rating 10, since there is only one tuple with rating 10 and age 2 18. Query Q36 is actually very similar to Q32, as the following simpler formulation shows: SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY S.rating, AVG Sailors S S. age> 18

and age 2 18. Query Q36 is actually very similar to Q32, as the following simpler formulation shows: SELECT FROM WHERE GROUP BY S.rating, AVG Sailors S S. age> 18 S.rating ( S.age ) AS avgage

## Common Mistakes

SQL: QueTies, Constraints, Triggers HAVING COUNT (*) > 1 This formulation of Q36 takes advantage of the fact that the WHERE clause is applied before grouping is done; thus, only sailors with age> 18 are left when grouping is done. It is instructive to consider yet another way of writing this query: SELECT FROM WHERE Temp.rating, Temp.avgage ( SELECT S.rating, AVG ( S.age ) AS COUNT (*) AS ratingcount FROM Sailors S WHERE S. age> 18 GROUP BY S.rating) AS Temp Temp.ratingcount > 1 avgage, This alternative brings out several interesting points. First, the FROM clause can also contain a nested subquery according to the SQL standard. 7 Second, the HAVING clause is not needed at all. Any query with a HAVING clause can be rewritten without one, but many queries are simpler to express with the HAVING clause. Finally, when a subquery appears in the FROM clause, using the AS keyword to give it a name is necessary (since otherwise we could not express, for instance, the condition Temp. ratingcount > 1). (Q37) Find those ratings fOT which the

AS keyword to give it a name is necessary (since otherwise we could not express, for instance, the condition Temp. ratingcount > 1). (Q37) Find those ratings fOT which the average age of sailoTS is the m'inirnum over all ratings. We use this query to illustrate that aggregate operations cannot be nested. One might consider writing it as follows: SELECT FROM WHERE S.rating Sailors S AVG (S.age) = ( SELECT MIN (AVG (S2.age)) FROM Sailors S2 GROUP BY S2.rating ) A little thought shows that this query will not work even if the expression MIN (AVG (S2.age)), which is illegal, were allowed. In the nested query, Sailors is partitioned int,o groups by rating, and the average age is computed for each rating value. for each group, applying MIN to this average age value for the group will return the same value! A correct version of this query follows. It essentially computes a temporary table containing the average age for each rating value and then finds the rating(s) for which this average age is the minimum. 7Not all commercial database systems

computes a temporary table containing the average age for each rating value and then finds the rating(s) for which this average age is the minimum. 7Not all commercial database systems currently support nested queries in the FROM clause.

## Related Concepts

- [aggregate-functions](./aggregate-functions.md)
- [having-clause](./having-clause.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `grouping` `aggregation`
