# Inner Joins

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 30 minutes

## Overview

Retrieving matching rows from two or more tables

📖 *Source: Page 142, Page 143, Page 144, Page 145, Page 146, Page 147*

## Definition

Relational AlgebTa and Calc"Uh18 107 For example, the expression p(C(l ----7 s'id1,5 ----7 sid2), 81 x R1) returns a relation that contains the tuples shown in Figure 4.11 and has the following schema: C(sidl: integer, ,marrw: string, mt'ing: integer, age: real, sid2: integer, bid: integer, day: dates). It is customary to include some additional operators in the algebra, but all of them can be defined in terms of the operators we have defined thus far. (In fact, the renaming operator is needed only for syntactic convenience, and even the n operator is redundant; R n 8 can be defined as R - (R - 8).) We consider these additional operators and their definition in terms of the basic operators in the next two subsections. 4.2.4 Joins The join operation is one of the most useful operations in relational algebra and the most commonly used way to combine information from two or more relations. Although a join can be defined as a cross-product followed by selec- tions and projections, joins arise much more frequently in practice than plain cross-products. Further, the

or more relations. Although a join can be defined as a cross-product followed by selec- tions and projections, joins arise much more frequently in practice than plain cross-products. Further, the result of a cross-product is typically much larger than the result of a join, and it is very important to recognize joins and imple- ment them without materializing the underlying cross-product (by applying the selections and projections 'on-the-fly'). For these reasons, joins have received a lot of attention, and there are several variants of the join operation. 1 Condition Joins The most general version of the join operation accepts a join condition c and a pair of relation instances as arguments and returns a relation instance. The join cond'it-ion is identical to a selection condition in form. The operation is defined as follows: R [:X)e S = O"e(R X S) Thus [:X) is defined to be a cross-product followed by a selection. Note that the condition c can (and typically does) refer to attributes of both Rand S. The reference to an attribute of a relation, say, R, can be

a selection. Note that the condition c can (and typically does) refer to attributes of both Rand S. The reference to an attribute of a relation, say, R, can be by positioll (of the form R.i) or by Ilame (of the form R.name). As an example, the result of Sl [><JS1.8id<Rl.sid R1 is shown in Figure 4.12. Because sid appears in both 81 and R1, the corresponding fields in the result of the cross-product 81 x R1 (and therefore in the result of 81 [:X)S1.sid<Rl.sid R1) 1Several variants of joins are not discussed in this chapter. An important c.la..'iS of joins, called 01lter joins, is discussed in Chapter 5.

108 CHAPTER ..t1 are unnamed. Domains are inherited from the corresponding fields of 81 and Rl. I (sid) I snarne I rating I age I···{si41:l bid da/lj I 22 I Dustin 7 45.0 58 I 103 I 11/12/96 I 31 I Lubber 8 .- 55.5 58 I 103 I 11/12/96 Figure 4.12 51 NSl. s id<R1.sid R1 Equijoin A common special case of the join operation R [>(] 8 is when the join condition consists solely of equalities (connected by 1\) of the form R.name1 = 8.name2, that is, equalities between two fields in Rand S. In this case, obviously, there is some redundancy in retaining both attributes in the result. For join conditions that contain only such equalities, the join operation is refined by doing an additional projection in which 8.name2 is dropped. The join operation with this refinement is called equijoin. The schema of the result of an equijoin contains the fields of R (with the same names and domains as in R) followed by the fields of 8 that do not appear in the join conditions. If

equijoin contains the fields of R (with the same names and domains as in R) followed by the fields of 8 that do not appear in the join conditions. If this set of fields in the result relation includes two fields that inherit the same name from Rand 8, they are unnamed in the result relation. We illustrate 81l:<JR.sid=5.sid Rl in Figure 4.13. Note that only one field called sid appears in the result. ~ ,marneI rating I age I· bid·1 day =tJ I 22 DustIn I 7 I 45.0 101 I 10/10/96 I I 58 Rust}~ I 10 I ~5.0 103 I 11/12/96 I Figure 4.13 81 MR ..,H1=S'."id HI Natural Join A further special ca.'3e of the join operation R [>(] S is an eqUlJom in which equalities arc specified on all fields having the same name in Rand S. In this case, we can simply omit the join condition; the default is that the join condition is a collection of equalities on all common fields. We call this special case a natumJ jo'in, and it has the

join condition; the default is that the join condition is a collection of equalities on all common fields. We call this special case a natumJ jo'in, and it has the nice property that the result is guaranteed not to have two fields with the saIne name.

## Syntax

Relai'ional Algelrra and Calculus lQ9 The equijoin expression 81 D<m..sid=s.sid R1 is actually a natural join al1d can simply be denoted as 81 [Xl R1, since the only common field is sid. If the two relations have no attributes in common, 81 [Xl Rl is simply the cross-product. 4.2.5 Division The division operator is useful for expressing certain kinds of queries for exam- ple, "Find the names of sailors who have reserved all boats." Understanding how to use the basic operators of the algebra to define division is a useful exer- cise. However, the division operator does not have the same importance as the other operators-it is not needed as often, and database systems do not try to exploit the semantics of division by implementing it as a distinct operator (as, for example, is done with the join operator). We discuss division through an example. Consider two relation instances A and B in which A has (exactly) two fields x and y and B has just one field y, with the same domain as in A. We define the division

and B in which A has (exactly) two fields x and y and B has just one field y, with the same domain as in A. We define the division operation AlB as the set of all x values (in the form of unary tuples) such that for every y value in (a tuple of) B, there is a tuple (x,y) in A. Another way to understand division is as follows. For each x value in (the first column of) A, consider the set of y values that appear in (the second field of) tuples of A with that x value. If this set contains (all y values in) B, the x value is in the result of AlB. An analogy with integer division may also help to understand division. For integers A and B, AlB is the largest integer Q such that Q * B ::::; A. :For relation instances A and B, AlB is the largest relation instance Q such that Q x B S:::A. Division is illustrated in Figure 4.14. It helps to think of A as

instances A and B, AlB is the largest relation instance Q such that Q x B S:::A. Division is illustrated in Figure 4.14. It helps to think of A as a relation listing the parts supplied by suppliers and of the B relations as listing parts. AIB'i computes suppliers who supply all parts listed in rdation instance Bi. Expressing AlBin terms of the ba...sic algebra operators is an interesting ex- ercise, and the reader should try to do this before reading further. The basic idea is to compute all :r values in A that are not disqualified. An x value is disqualified if lJy attaching a y value from B, we obtain a tuple (x,y) that is not in A. We can compute disqualified tuples using the algebra expression Thus, we can define AlBa.....,

110 A I sno i pno I 81 \ pI I sl p2 ~._~~ 81 i p4 82 \ pI ~_P2 -~ 83 ' p2 84 p2 s4 p4 CHAPTER$4 Bl [P.!!~J AlBl ~;~J ,....---, ~ LEU I 82 I B2 I pno ] 83 BE 0 p4 ~ AlB2 B3 ~ BE B1J 84 p2 ~ p4 AlB3 [ill Figure 4.14 Examples Illustrating Division To understand the division operation in full generality, we have to consider the case when both x and yare replaced by a set of attributes. The generalization is straightforward and left as an exercise for the reader. We discuss two additional examples illustrating division (Queries Q9 and Q10) later in this section. 4.2.6 More Examples of Algebra Queries We now present several examples to illustrate how to write queries in relational algebra. We use the Sailors, Reserves, and Boats schema for all our examples in this section. We use parentheses as needed to make our algebra expressions unambiguous. Note that all the example queries in this chapter are given a unique query number. The query

this section. We use parentheses as needed to make our algebra expressions unambiguous. Note that all the example queries in this chapter are given a unique query number. The query numbers are kept unique across both this chapter and the SQL query chapter (Chapter 5). This numbering makes it easy to identify a query when it is revisited in the context of relational calculus and SQL and to compare different ways of writing the same query. (All references to a query can be found in the subject index.) In the rest of this chapter (and in Chapter 5), we illustrate queries using the instances 83 of Sailors, R2 of Reserves, and B1 of Boats, shown in Figures 4.15, 4.16, and 4.17, respectively. (Q1) Find the names of sailors who have rcscT'ucd boat lOS. This query can be written as follows: ".marne (( (Jbid=1O:~Re.5erve8)[XJ 8ailoT.5)

## Examples

Relational Algebra and Calcul1ls ~l »> ....."""'.+A.".,'" hAh 22 Dustin 7 45.0 29 Brutus 1 33.0 31 Lubber 8 55.5 32 Andy 8 25.5 58 Rusty 10 35.0 64 Horatio 7 35.0 71 Zorba 10 16.0 74 Horatio 9 35.0 85 Art 3 25.5 95 Bob 3 63.5 Figure 4.15 An Instance 83 of Sailors 111, 22 101 10/10/98 22 102 10/10/98 22 103 10/8/98 22 104 10/7/98 31 102 11/10/98 31 103 11/6/98 31 104 11/12/98 64 101 9/5/98 64 102 9/8/98 74 103 9/8/98 Figure 4.16 An Instance R2 of Reserves We first compute the set of tuples in Reserves with bid = 103 and then take the natural join of this set with Sailors. This expression can be evaluated on in- stances of Reserves and Sailors. Evaluated on the instances R2 and S3, it yields a relation that contains just one field, called sname, and three tuples (Dustin), (Horatio), and (Lubber). (Observe that two sailors are called Horatio and only one of them has reserved a red boat.) [~]bname I color· I 101 Interlake blue 102 Interlake

(Dustin), (Horatio), and (Lubber). (Observe that two sailors are called Horatio and only one of them has reserved a red boat.) [~]bname I color· I 101 Interlake blue 102 Interlake red 103 Clipper green 104 Marine red Figure 4.17 An Instance HI of Boats We can break this query into smaller pieces llsing the renaming operator p: p(Temp1, IJbir1=103 ReseTves) p(Temp2, Temp11XJ Sailor's) 1Tsname(Temp2) Notice that because we are only llsing p to give names to intermediate relations, the renaming list is optional and is omitted. TempI denotes an intermediate relation that identifies reservations of boat 103. Temp2 is another intermediate relation, and it denotes sailors who have mad(~ a reservation in the set Templ. The instances of these relations when evaluating this query on the instances R2 and S3 are illustrated in Figures 4.18 and 4.19. Finally, we extract the sname column from Temp2.

112 22 10~~ 10/8/98 31 103 11/6/98 74 103 9/8/98 Dustin 31 Lubber 8 74 Horatio 9 CHAPTER;l 10/8/98 11/6/98-- 9/8/98 Figure 4.18 Instance of TempI Figure 4.19 Instance of Temp2 The version of the query using p is essentially the same as the original query; the use of p is just syntactic sugar. However, there are indeed several distinct ways to write a query in relational algebra. Here is another way to write this query: Jrsname(CJbid=103(Reserves IX! Sailors)) In this version we first compute the natural join of Reserves and Sailors and then apply the selection and the projection. This example offers a glimpse of the role played by algebra in a relational DBMS. Queries are expressed by users in a language such as SQL. The DBMS translates an SQL query into (an extended form of) relational algebra and then looks for other algebra expressions that produce the same answers but are cheaper to evaluate. If the user's query is first translated into the expression 7fsname (CJbid=103 (Reserves IX! Sailors)) a good query optimizer will find the equivalent expression

answers but are cheaper to evaluate. If the user's query is first translated into the expression 7fsname (CJbid=103 (Reserves IX! Sailors)) a good query optimizer will find the equivalent expression 7rsname ((CJb·id=103Reserves) IX! Sailors) Further, the optimizer will recognize that the second expression is likely to be less expensive to compute because the sizes of intermediate relations are smaller, thanks to the early use of selection. (Q2) Find the names of sailors who ha've reserved a red boat. 7f.marne ((CJcolor='red'Boats) IX! Reserves !><J SailoI's) This query involves a series of two joins. First, we choose (tuples describing) red boats. Then, we join this set with Reserves (natural join, with equality specified on thE) bid column) to identify reservations of red boats. Next, we join the resulting intermediate relation with Sailors (natural join, with equality specified on the sid column) to retrieve the names of sailors who have rnade reservations for red boats. Finally, we project the sailors' names. The answer, when evaluated on the instances B1, R2, and S3, contains the names Dustin, Horatio, and Lubber.

## Related Concepts

- [joins-intro](./joins-intro.md)
- [outer-join](./outer-join.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `joins` `inner-join`
