# Correlated Subqueries

🔴 **Difficulty:** Advanced
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 35 minutes

## Overview

Subqueries that reference columns from the outer query

📖 *Source: Page 232, Page 233, Page 234, Page 235, Page 236, Page 237, Page 238*

## Definition

212 Section 2 More SQL skills cts you need them How to code correlated subqueries So far, all of the subqueries in this chapter have been uncorrelated subque- ries. An uncorrelated subquery is executed only once for the entire query. However, you can also code a correlated subquery that's executed once for each row that's processed by the main query. This type of query is similar to using a loop to do repetitive processing in a procedural programming language like PHP or Java. Figure 7-7 shows how correlated subqueries work. The example 1·etrieves rows from the Invoices table for those invoices that have an invoice total that's greater than the average of all the invoices for the same vendor. To do that, the WHERE clause of the subquery refers to the vendor_id value of the main query. That way, only the invoices for the current vendor are included in the average. Each time MySQL processes a row in the main query, it substitutes the value in the vendor_id column for the column reference in the subquery. Then, MySQL executes the

average. Each time MySQL processes a row in the main query, it substitutes the value in the vendor_id column for the column reference in the subquery. Then, MySQL executes the subquery based on that value. For example, if the vendor_ id value is 95, MySQL executes this subquery: SELECT AVG (invoice_ total) FROM i nvoic e s WHERE vendor_ id = 95 After MySQL executes this subquery, it uses the returned value to detern1ine whether to include the current invoice in the result set. For example, for vendor 95, the subquery returns a value of 28.501667. Then, MySQL compares that value with the invoice total of the current invoice. If the invoice total is greater than that value, MySQL includes the invoice in the result set. Otherwise, it doesn't. MySQL repeats this process until it has processed each of the invoices in the Invoices table. In this figure, the WHERE clause of the subquery qualifies the vendor_id column from the main query with the alias that's assigned to the Invoices table in that query. This is necessary because this statement

clause of the subquery qualifies the vendor_id column from the main query with the alias that's assigned to the Invoices table in that query. This is necessary because this statement uses the same table in the sub and main queries. So, the use of a table alias avoids ambiguity. However, if a subquery uses a different table than the main query, a table alias isn't necessary. Since correlated subqueri.es can be difficult to code, you may want to test a subquery separately before using it within another SELECT statement. To do that, however, you'll need to substitute a constant value for the variable that refers to a column in the outer query. That's what we did to get the average invoice total for vendor 95. Once you 're sure that the subquery works on its own, you can replace the constant value with a reference to the outer query so you can use it within a SELECT statement.

Get each invoice amount that's higher than the vendor's average invoice amount SELECT vendor_ id, invoice_ number, invoice_ total FROM invoices i WHERE invoice_ total > (SELECT AVG(invoice_total) FROM invoices WHERE vendor_ id = i.vendor_id) ORDER BY vendor_ id, invoice_total Chapter 7 How to l·ode subqueries 213 The value returned by the subquery for vendor 95 28.501667 The result set _j_ vendor jd lnvoice_number invoice_ total 83 31359783 1575.00 95 111-92R-10095 32.70 95 lll-92R-10093 39.77 95 111-92R-10092 ~ .21 I 110 P-0259 26881.40 ( 36 rows ) Description • A correlated subquery is a subquery that is executed once for each row in the main query. In contrast, an uncorrelated subquery is executed only once. All of the subqueries in the previous figures are uncorrelated subqueries. • A correlated subquery refers to a value that's provided by a column in the main query. For each different value that's returned by the main query for that column, the su bquery returns a different result. • To refer to a column in the main query, you can qualify the column with a

the main query for that column, the su bquery returns a different result. • To refer to a column in the main query, you can qualify the column with a table name or alias. If a correlated subquery uses the same table as the main query, you can use table aliases to re1nove ambiguity. Figure 7-7 How to code correlated subqueries

## Explanation

214 Section 2 More SQL skills cts you need them How to use the EXISTS operator Figure 7-8 shows how to use the EXISTS operator with a subquery. This operator tests whether the subquery returns a result set. In other words, it tests whether the result set exists. When you use this operator, the subquery doesn't actually return a result set to the outer query. Instead, it returns an indication of whether any rows satisfy the search condition of the subquery. Because of that, queries that use this operator execute quickly. You typically use the EXISTS operator with a correlated subquery as shown in this figure. This query retrieves all the vendors in the Vendors table that don't have invoices in the Invoices table. Although this query returns the same vendors as the queries shown in figure 7-3, it executes more quickly than either of those • quenes. In this example, the correlated subquery selects all invoices that have the same vendor_id value as the current vendor in the outer query. Because the subquery doesn't actually return a result set,

example, the correlated subquery selects all invoices that have the same vendor_id value as the current vendor in the outer query. Because the subquery doesn't actually return a result set, it doesn't matter what columns are included in the SELECT clause. As a result, it's customary to j11st code an asterisk. After the subquery is executed, the search condition in the WHERE clause of the main query uses the NOT EXISTS operator to test whether any invoices were found for the current vendor. If not, the vendor row is included in the result set.

Chapter 7 How to l·ode subqueries 215 The syntax of a subquery that uses the EXISTS operator WHERE [NOT] EXISTS (subquery) Get all vendors that don't have invoices SELECT vendor id, vendor_ name, vendor_state FROM vendors WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT* FROM invoices WHERE vendor_ id = vendors.vendor_ id) The result set vendor jd vendor _name -33 35 36 38 39 I '10 (88 rows ) Description Nielson Cal State Termite Grayfift Venture Communications Int'I Custom Printing Company Nat Assoc of CoUege Stores vendor _state OH CA CA NY MO OH - • You can use the EXISTS operator to test that one or more rows are returned by the subquery. • You can use the NOT EXISTS operator to test that no rows are returned by the subquery. • When you use these operators with a subquery, it doesn't matter what columns you specify in the SELECT clause. As a result, you typically just code an asterisk ( * ). Figure 7-8 How to use the EXISTS operator -

## Examples

216 Section 2 More SQL skills cts you need them How to code subqueries in other clauses Now that you know how to code subqueries in the WHERE clause of a SELECT statement, you're ready to learn how to code them in the HAVING, FROM, and SELECT clauses. How to code subqueries in the HAVING clause When you code a HA YING clause, you specify a search condition just as you do when you code a WHERE clause. That includes search conditions that contain subqueries. To learn how to code subqueries in a HAVING clause, then, you can refer back to figures 7-3 through 7-8. How to code subqueries in the SELECT clause Figure 7-9 shows how to use subqueries in the SELECT clause. To do that, you code the subquery in place of a column specification. As a result, the subquery must return a single value for that column. In most cases, you code correlated subqueries in the SELECT clause. In this figure, for example, the subquery calculates the maximum invoice date for each vendor in the Vendors table.

In most cases, you code correlated subqueries in the SELECT clause. In this figure, for example, the subquery calculates the maximum invoice date for each vendor in the Vendors table. To do that, the subquery refers to the vendor_id column from the Vendors table in the main query. Subqueries coded in the SELECT clause are typically difficult to read. As a result, you shouldn't use them if you can fmd another solution. In most cases, you can replace the subquery with a join. In this figure, for example, the frrst query can be restated as shown in the second query. This query joins the Vendors and Invoices tables, groups the rows by vendor_name, and uses the MAX function to calculate the maximum invoice date for each vendor. As a result, this query is easier to read.

Chapter 7 How to l·ode subqueries 217 Get the most recent invoice date for each vendor SELECT vendor_name, (SELECT MAX(invoice_date) FROM invoices WHERE vendor_ id = vendors.vendor_ id) AS latest_inv FROM vendors ORDER BY latest inv DESC The result set vendor _name latest_lllV ► Federal Express Corporation 2018-08-02 Blue Cross 2018-08.Ql Maftoy Lithographing Inc 2018-07-31 Cardinal Business Media, Inc. 2018-07-28 I Zylka Design 2018--07-25 Ford Motor Credit Company 2018-07-24 (122 rows) The same query restated using a join SELECT vendor_name, MAX(invoice_date) AS latest_ inv FROM vendors v LEFT JOIN invoices i ON v.vendor_ id = i.vendor_ id GROUP BY vendor_name ORDER BY latest_inv DESC Description • When you code a subquery in the SELECT clause, the subquery must return a single value. • When you code a subquery in the SELECT clause, you typically use a correlated subquery. • A query that includes a subquery in its SELECT clause can typically be restated using a join instead of the subquery. Because a join is usually faster and easier to read, subqueries are seldom coded in the SELECT clause. Figure 7-9

typically be restated using a join instead of the subquery. Because a join is usually faster and easier to read, subqueries are seldom coded in the SELECT clause. Figure 7-9 How to code subqueries in the SELECT clause . I

218 Section 2 More SQL skills cts you need them How to code subqueries in the FROM clause Figure 7-10 shows how to code a subquery in the FROM clause. To do that, you code a subquery in place of a table specification. When you code a subquery in the FROM clause, it can return a result set that contains any number of rows and columns. This result set is sometimes referred to as an inline view. Subqueries are typically used in the FROM clause to create inline views that provide summarized data to another summary query. In this figure, for example, the subquery returns a result set that contains the vendor state, the vendor name, and the sum of invoice totals for each vendor. To do that, it groups the vendors by state and name. Once the subquery returns this result set, the main query groups the result set by vendor state and gets the largest sum of invoice totals for each state. This rettrrns the invoice total for the top vendor in each state. When you code a

by vendor state and gets the largest sum of invoice totals for each state. This rettrrns the invoice total for the top vendor in each state. When you code a subquery in the FROM clause, you must assign a table alias to the subquery. This is required even if you don't use the table alias in the main query. In this figure, for example, the query assigns a table alias oft (for te.mporary table) to the subquery. In addition, you should assign a column alias to all calculated columns in a subquery. In this figure, for example, the subquery assigns a column alias of sum_of_invoices to the result of the SUM function. That makes it easier to refer to these columns from other clauses in the st1bquery if you need to do that. It also makes it possible to refer to the column from the main query. In this example, for instance, the sum_of_invoices column is referred to by tl1e SELECT clause.

## Related Concepts

- [subqueries](./subqueries.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `subquery` `correlated`
