# Database Security

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 35 minutes

## Overview

Managing users, privileges, roles, and securing database access

📖 *Source: Page 540, Page 541, Page 542, Page 543, Page 544, Page 545, Page 546, Page 547, Page 548*

## Definition

520 Section 5 Database administration Perspective In this chapter, you were introduced to the responsibilities of a database administrator. In addition, you learned how to perform some of these respon- sibilities. For example, you learned how to monitor the server, configure the server, and work with log files. In the next two chapters, you'll learn how to perform two more critical responsibilities of a DBA. First, in chapter 18, you'll learn how to secure a database. Then, in chapter 19, you'll learn how to backup and restore a database. Although this isn't everything a DBA needs to know, this is enough to get started with the administration of many types of databases. In addition, it provides the background that you need for learning more about database administration on your own. Terms database administrator (DBA) database replication master slave configuration ftle data file log ftle general log error log Exercises slow query log binary log relay log process mysqld program MySQL daemon status variable system variable 1. Start MySQL Workbench and open the Client Connections window. If the process list isn't

query log binary log relay log process mysqld program MySQL daemon status variable system variable 1. Start MySQL Workbench and open the Client Connections window. If the process list isn't displayed, click on the Refresh button in the lower right corner to display it. Review the list to see that it includes two processes for the current database. Then, return to the Home tab, open another connection for the root user, and select a different database as the current database. Next, return to the Client Connections window to see that it includes two additional processes for the new connection. 2. Use Workbench's Server Variables window to view these status variables: connections, threads_connected, bytes_received, and bytes_sent. Read the descriptions for these variables to get an idea of what they do. 3. Use Workbench's Se1-ver Variables window to view the system variables named basedir and datadir. Note the paths to these di1·ectories. Then, view the system variables named log_error and log_bin. Note whether the log_bin variable is set to a value of ON or OFF and whether the log_error variable is set

Then, view the system variables named log_error and log_bin. Note whether the log_bin variable is set to a value of ON or OFF and whether the log_error variable is set to the name of an error log, indicating that it is on.

Chapter 17 An. introduction to database administration 521 4. Use the Explorer (Windows) or the Finder (macOS) to view MySQL's data directory. To do that, you may have to modify your operating system settings so you can see hidden directories and files. With macOS, you may also need to change the permissions for the directory to give yourself the read privilege. Note that the subdirectories of the data directory correspond to the databases that are running on yo11r system. If the data dil·ectory contains any log files, note the names of these files. 5. View the files in the AP subdirectory and note how the names of the files correspond with the tables of this database. To do this on a Mac, you may need to change the permissions for the directory to give yourself the read privilege for the directory. 6. Use Workbench's Options File window to enable the e1Tor log and the binary log, if they aren't already enabled. Use whatever directories and names you want for the logs. If you get an error indicating that access is

e1Tor log and the binary log, if they aren't already enabled. Use whatever directories and names you want for the logs. If you get an error indicating that access is denied, you may need to stop Workbench and run it as an administrator. After you enable these logs, restart the server. 7. Use the Explorer (Windows) or the Finder (macOS) to find MySQL's configu- ration file. Note the directory and name of this file on your computer. 8. Use Workbench's Server Logs wiI1dow to view the en·or log. Note that it includes messages about the startup and shutdown of the server. 9. Write and execute an INSERT statement that inserts a new row into the Invoices table. 10. Use a SET statement to temporarily enable the general log. Then, to make sure that this variable was set, use a SELECT statement to view the variable. If you get an error indicating that access is denied, you may need to stop Workbench and run it as an administrator. 11. Use a SELECT statement to select all rows from the Invoices table.

indicating that access is denied, you may need to stop Workbench and run it as an administrator. 11. Use a SELECT statement to select all rows from the Invoices table. 12. Use Workbench's Server Logs window to view the general log, and click on the Refresh button. Note that it includes the SELECT statement from the previous step. 13. Use a SET statement to disable the general log. Then, to make sure that this variable was set, use a SELECT statement to view the variable.

## Explanation

How to secure a database If you have installed MySQL on your own computer and you have only been working with sample databases, security hasn't been much of a concern. However, when you use MySQL in a production environment, you must configure security to prevent misuse of your data. In this chapter, you' 11 learn how to do that by writing SQL statements to create use1·s that have restricted access to your database. In addition, you'll learn how to use MySQL Workbench to perform many of the security-related tasks that you can perform with SQL code. An introduction to user accounts ..................................... 524 An introduction to SQL state1nents for user accou nts ................................. 524 A su1nmary of privileges ............................... H••······ .. ·····························••H.526 The four privilege levels .............................................................................. 530 The grant tables in the mysql database ........................................................ 530 How to work with users and privileges ............................ 532 How to create, rename, and drop users ....................................................... 532 How to specify user account names ............................................................ 534 How to grant privileges .................................................................................. 536 How to view privileges ................................................................................ 538 How to revoke privileges ............................................................................

and drop users ....................................................... 532 How to specify user account names ............................................................ 534 How to grant privileges .................................................................................. 536 How to view privileges ................................................................................ 538 How to revoke privileges ............................................................................ 540 How to change passwords ............................................................................ 542 A script that creates users ........................................................................... 544 How to work with roles ...................................................... 546 How to create, manage, and drop roles ...................................................... 546 A script that creates users and roles ............................................................ 550 How to use MySQL Workbench ........................................ 552 How to work with users at1d privileges ....................................................... 552 How to connect as a user for testing ............................................................ 556 Perspective ......................................................................... 560

524 Section 5 Database administration An introduction to user accounts Before you leain the details of managing database security, you should have a general idea of how user accounts work. That's what you'll learn in this topic. An introduction to SQL statements for user accounts Figure 18-1 presents a script that contains the SQL statements that are used to create two users and grant them privileges. You'll learn more about how the statements in this script work later in this chapter. For now, we just want to introduce you to the concepts of users and privileges. This script starts with CREATE USER statements that create two users, named ap_admin and ap_user. Both users can only connect from the local server, and both have a password of ''pa55word''. Although this password isn't realistic, it illustrates how these statements work. After the users are created, the GRANT statements set up privileges for each user. Here, the user named ap_admin is granted all the privileges on the AP database. As a result, this user can select, insert, update, and delete data from the

each user. Here, the user named ap_admin is granted all the privileges on the AP database. As a result, this user can select, insert, update, and delete data from the tables of the AP database. In addition, this user has many other privileges such as creating or dropping tables, indexes, and views in the AP database. By contrast, the user named ap_user can only select, insert, update, and delete data in the AP database. If you want to view tl1e privileges for a user, you can use the SHOW GRANTS statement. In this figure, for example, you can see the privileges for the user named ap_admin.

Chapter 18 How to secure a database 525 A script that creates two users and grants them privileges CREATE USER ap_ admin@loc alhost IDENTIFIED BY 'password'; CREATE USER ap_user@localhost IDENTIFIED BY 'password'; GRANT ALL ON ap.* TO ap_ admin@localhost; GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON ap.* TO ap_user@localhost; A statement that displays the privileges for the ap_admin user SHOW GRANTS FOR ap_admin@localhost Grants for ap_admin@foc.alhost - ► GRANT USAGE ON •.•TO • ap _admin' @· locaU,~t. GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON 'ap . . • TO 'ap _admn. @· localhost. Description • You use the CREATE USER statement to create a user that has no privileges. • You use the GRANT statement to grant p1ivileges to a user. • You use the SHOW GRANTS statement to view the privileges for a user. • For a partial list of privileges that can be granted, see figure 18-2. Figure 18-1 An introduction to SQL statements for user accounts

## Examples

526 Section 5 Database administration A summary of privileges Figure 18-2 summarizes some of the common privileges that a database user can have. To strut, a user can have privileges to work with the data that's stored in a database. These privileges allow a user to execute DML statements, such as the SELECT, UPDATE, INSERT, and DELETE statements. They also allow a user to execute stored procedures and functions. These are the most common types of privileges, since most users need to be able to work with the data that's stored in a database. A user can also have privileges to modify the definition of a database. These privileges allow a user to execute DDL statements such as the CREATE TABLE, ALTER TABLE, DROP TABLE, CREATE INDEX, and DROP INDEX state- ments. These privileges are common for administrative users of a database such as database administrators and programmers, but they aren't commonly granted to the end users of a database. In addition, a user can have privileges to work with the stored programs of a database. These privileges allow a

aren't commonly granted to the end users of a database. In addition, a user can have privileges to work with the stored programs of a database. These privileges allow a user to execute the statements that you learned about in chapters 15 and 16. For example, the CREATE ROUTINE privilege allows a user to execute the CREATE PROCEDURE and CREATE FUNCTION statements.

Privileges for working with data Privilege Description SELECT INSERT UPDATE DELETE EXECUTE Select data from a table. Insert data into a table. Update data in a table. Delete data from a table. Execute a stored procedure or function. Chapter 18 How to secure a database 527 Privileges for modifying the database structure Privilege Description CREATE ALTER DROP INDEX CREATE VI EWS CREATE ROUTINE ALTER ROUTINE TRIGGER EVENT Description Create a database or a table. Alter a table. Drop a database or a table. Create or drop an index. Create views. Create a stored procedure or function. Alter or drop a stored procedure or function. Create or drop a trigger on a table. Create, alter, drop, or view an event for a database. • The privileges a user has to work with a database control the operations that the user can perfonn on the database. • Privileges for working with the data in a database are typically given to all users of the database, include end users. • P1ivileges for modifying the structure of a database are typically given to database

data in a database are typically given to all users of the database, include end users. • P1ivileges for modifying the structure of a database are typically given to database administrators and programmers. Figure 18-2 A summary of privileges (part 1 of 2)

528 Section 5 Database administration The privileges you learned about in part 1 of figure 18-2 are called object privileges because they allow the user to create and work with database objects, such as tables, views, and stored procedures. The exact privileges that are avail- able for an object depend on the type of object. In contrast to object privileges, administrative privileges allow the user to create new user accounts and roles, show the databases available from the server, shut down the server, and reload the tables that store the privileges for users. These privileges are listed in the first table in part 2 of this figure. The second table lists some other privileges you '11 use frequently. The ALL privilege grants all privileges available at the specified level except the GRANT OPTION privilege. In general, you only grant the ALL privilege to users like database administrators or programmers. In some cases, you may also want to grant these users the GRANT OPTION privilege. If yot1 do, they can grant privileges to other t1sers. The USAGE privilege doesn't grant any

some cases, you may also want to grant these users the GRANT OPTION privilege. If yot1 do, they can grant privileges to other t1sers. The USAGE privilege doesn't grant any privileges to a user. In most cases, you'll use this privilege when you want to give a user the ability to grai1t privi- leges to other users. In that case, this privilege indicates that the existing privi- leges for the user shouldn't be changed. You' 11 see an example of how this works later in this chapter. Before you go on, you should know that MySQL provides many privileges other than the ones shown here. As a result, if the privileges presented in this chapter aren't adequate for your security needs, you can refer to the MySQL Reference Manual for more information. To get started, you can search for ''privileges provided'' or ''privileges''. You can also use the SHOW PRIVILEGES statement to view a list of all the privileges that are available.

## Related Concepts

- [mysql-workbench](./mysql-workbench.md)

---

**Tags:** `mysql` `security` `users` `privileges`
