# Introduction to Joins

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 45 minutes

## Overview

Combining data from multiple tables using INNER JOIN, OUTER JOIN, and cross joins

📖 *Source: Page 130, Page 131, Page 132, Page 133, Page 134, Page 135, Page 136, Page 137, Page 138, Page 139, Page 140, Page 141*

## Definition

110 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL Perspective The goal of this chapter has been to teach you the basic skills for coding SELECT statements. As a result, you'll use these skills in almost every SELECT statement you code. As you'll see in the next chapter and in chapters 6 and 7, though, there's a lot more to coding SELECT statements than what's presented here. In these chapters, then, you'll learn additional skills for coding SELECT statements. When you complete these chapters, you' 11 know everything you need to know about retrieving data from a MySQL database. Terms keyword base table search condition filter Boolean expression • expression column alias arithmetic expression arithmetic operator order of precedence literal value string function argument Exercises parameter concatenate comparison operator logical operator compound condition subquery string patten1 mask wildcard regular expression null value nested sort offset Run some of the examples in this chapter In these exercises, you '11 use MySQL Workbench to run some of the scripts for the examples in this chapter. This assumes that you already know how to use

chapter In these exercises, you '11 use MySQL Workbench to run some of the scripts for the examples in this chapter. This assumes that you already know how to use MySQL Workbench, as described in chapter 2. 1. Start MySQL Workbench. 2. Open the script named 3-02.sql that you should fmd in this directory: c:\murach\rnysql\book_scripts\ch03. When it opens, you should see all of the queries for figure 3-2. Note that each of these queries has a semicolon at the end of it. 3. Move the insertion point into the first query and press Ctrl+Enter or click on the Exectite Current Statement button to run the query. This shows you the data that's in the Invoices table that you'll be working with in this chapter. 4. Move the insertion point into the second query and run it.

Chapter 3 How to retrieve data from a sin.gle table 111 5. Open the script named 3-05.sql in the ch03 directory. Then, run the second query. When you do, you '11 see that the 1·esult set is in sequence by the invoice id column. 6. Delete the ORDER BY clause from the SELECT statement and run the query again. Scroll through the result set to see that the rows are no longer in a particular sequence. When you 're done, close the script without saving the changes. 7. Open and run the queries for any of the other examples in this chapter that you're interested in reviewing. Enter and run your own SELECT statements In these exercises, you'll enter and run your own SELECT statements. To do that, you can open the script for an example that is similar to the state1nent you need to write, copy the statement into a new SQL tab, and modify the statement. That can save you both time and syntax errors. 8. Write a SELECT statement that returns three columns fro1n the Vendors table:

a new SQL tab, and modify the statement. That can save you both time and syntax errors. 8. Write a SELECT statement that returns three columns fro1n the Vendors table: vendor_11ame, vendor_contact_last_naine, and vendor_contact_first_naine. Then, run this statement to make sure it works correctly. Add an ORDER BY clause to this state1nent that sorts the result set by last name and then first name, both in ascending sequence. Then, run this state- ment again to make sure it works correctly. This is a good way to build and test a statement, one clause at a time. 9. Write a SELECT statement that returns one column from the Vendors table named full_name that joins the vendor_contact_last_name and vendor contact first name columns. - - - For1nat this column with the last name, a co1nma, a space, and the first 11arne like this: Doe, John Sort the result set by last name and then first name in ascending sequence. Return only the contacts whose last name begins with the letter A, B, C, or E. This should retrieve 41 rows. 10. Write

and then first name in ascending sequence. Return only the contacts whose last name begins with the letter A, B, C, or E. This should retrieve 41 rows. 10. Write a SELECT statement that returns these column names and data from the Invoices table: Due Date The invoice due date column Invoice Total The invoice total colu1nn 10% lOo/o of the value of invoice total Plus lOo/o The value of invoice_total plus 10% Return only the rows with an invoice total that's greater than or equal to 500 and less than or equal to 1000. This should retrieve 12 rows. Sort the result set in descending sequence by invoice_due_date.

112 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL 11. Write a SELECT statement that returns these columns from the Invoices table: invoice number - invoice total - payment_credit_total balance_due The invoice number column - The invoice total column Sum of the payment_total and credit_total columns The invoice total column minus the payment_total and credit_total columns Return only invoices that have a balance due that's greater than $50. Sort the result set by balance due in descending sequence. Use the LIMIT clause so the result set contains only the rows with the 5 largest balances. Work with nulls and test expressions 12. Write a SELECT statement that returns these columns from the Invoices table: invoice number - invoice date - balance due payment_date The invoice_number column The invoice date column The invoice_tota] column minus the payment_total and credit total columns The payment_date column Return only the rows where the payment_date column contains a null value. This should retrieve 11 rows. 13. Write a SELECT statement without a FROM clause that uses the c ·URRENT DATE function to return the current date in

a null value. This should retrieve 11 rows. 13. Write a SELECT statement without a FROM clause that uses the c ·URRENT DATE function to return the current date in its default format. Use the DATE FORMAT function to format the current date in this format: nun-dd-yyyy This displays the month, day, and four-digit year of the current date. Give this column an alias of current_date. To do that, you must enclose the alias in quotes since that name is already used by the CURRENT_DATE function. 14. Write a SELECT statement without a FROM clause that creates a row with these columns: starting_principal interest principal_plus_interest Starting principal of $50,000 6.5% of the principal The principal plus the interest To calculate the third column, add the expressions you used fo1· the first two columns.

## Explanation

How to retrieve data from two or more tables ln the last chapter, you lea111ed how to create result sets that contain data from a single table. Now, this chapter shows you how to create result sets that contain data from two or more tables. To do that, you can use an inner join, an outer • • • JOin, or a union. How to work with inner joins ............................................. 114 How to code an i11ner join ............................................................................ 114 How to use table aliases ............................................................................... 116 How to join to a table in another database .................................................. 118 How to use compound join conditions ........................................................ 120 How to use a self-join .................................................................................. 122 How to join more than two tables ................................................................ 124 How to use the implicit inner join syntax .................................................... 126 How to work with outer joins ............................................. 128 How to code an outer join ............................................................................ 128 Outer join examples ...................................................................................... 130 Other skills for working with joins .................................... 134 How to join tables with the USING keyword .............................................. 134 How to join tables with the NATURAL keyword ....................................... 136

...................................................................................... 130 Other skills for working with joins .................................... 134 How to join tables with the USING keyword .............................................. 134 How to join tables with the NATURAL keyword ....................................... 136 How to use cross joins ....................................................................................... 138 How to work with unions ................................................... 140 How to code a union .................................................................................... 140 A union that combines result sets from different tables .............................. 140 A union that combines result sets from the same tables ............................. 142 A union that simulates a full outer join ....................................................... 144 Perspective ......................................................................... 146

114 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL How to work with inner joins A join lets you combine columns from two or more tables into a single result set. To start, this chapter shows how to code the most common type of join, an • • • inner JOtn. How to code an inner join Figure 4-1 shows how to use the explicit syntax to code an inner join. This syntax is also called the SQL-92 syritax because it was introduced by the SQL-92 standards. It's generally considered a best p1·actice to use this syntax. To join data from two tables, you code the names of the two tables in the FROM clause along with the JOIN keyword and an ON phrase that specifies the join condition. The join condition indicates how the two tables should be compared. In most cases, they're compared based on the relationship between the primary key of the first table and a foreign key of the second table. In this figure, for example, the SELECT statement joins data from the Vendors and Invoices tables based

key of the first table and a foreign key of the second table. In this figure, for example, the SELECT statement joins data from the Vendors and Invoices tables based on the vendor_id column in each table. Since the join condition uses the equal operator, the value of the vendor_id column in a row in the Vendors table must match the vendor_id in a row in the Invoices table for that row to be included in the result set. In other words, only vendors with one or more invoices are included. Although you code most inner joins using the equal operator, you can compare two tables based on other conditions too. For example, you can use the greater than or less than operators for an inner join condition. In this figure, the Vendors table is joined with the Invoices table using a column that has the same name in both tables: vendor_id. As a result, the columns must be qualified so MySQL can tell which table they come from. To code a qualified column name, you can enter the table

tables: vendor_id. As a result, the columns must be qualified so MySQL can tell which table they come from. To code a qualified column name, you can enter the table name and a pe1iod in front of the column name. In this figure, the SELECT statement only uses quali- fied column names in the join condition. However, you must qualify a column name anywhere it appears in the statement if the same name occurs in both tables. If you don't, MySQL returns an error indicating that the column name is ambiguous.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data f rom two or m.ore tables 115 The explicit syntax for an inner join SELECT select_ list FROM table_ l [INNER] JOIN table_ 2 ON join_condition_ l [[INNER] JOIN table_ 3 ON join_condition_ 2] ... An inner join of the Vendors and Invoices tables SELECT invoice_number, vendor_name FROM vendors INNER JOIN invoices ON vendors.vendor_ id = invoices.vendor_id ORDER BY invoice_number invoice_number vendor name - - ► 0-2058 Malloy Lithographing Inc 0-2060 Malloy Lithographing Inc 0-2436 Malloy Lithographing Inc 1-200-5164 Federal Express Corporation 1-202-2978 Federal Express Corporation 10843 Yesmed,Inc (114 rows ) Description • A join combines columns from two or more tables into a result set based on the join conditions you specify. For an inner join, only those rows that satisfy the join condition are included in the result set. • A join condition names a column in each of the two tables involved in the join and indicates how the two columns should be compared. In most cases, you use the equal operator to retrieve rows with matching columns. However, you can

involved in the join and indicates how the two columns should be compared. In most cases, you use the equal operator to retrieve rows with matching columns. However, you can also use any of the other comparison operators in a join condition. • Tables are typically joined on the relationship between the primary key in one table and a foreign key in the other table. However, you can also join tables based on relationships not defined in the database. These are called ad hoc r·elationships. • If the two co]umns in a join condition have the same name, you must qualify them with the table name so MySQL can distinguish between them. To code a qitalified column name, type the table name, followed by a period, followed by the column name. Note • The INNER keyword is optional and is seldom used. Figure 4-1 How to code an inner join " L

## Examples

116 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL How to use table aliases When you name a table to be joined in the FROM clause, you can refer to the table by an alias as shown in figure 4-2. A table alias is an alternative table name that's typically just a letter or two. This makes it easier to qualify the column names in the rest of the statement, and it makes the query easier to code and read, especially when the table names are long. The first example in this figure joins data from the Vendors and Invoices tables. Here, both tables have been assigned aliases that consist of a single letter. The second example only assigns an alias to the second table, not the first. Here, the alias shortens the name of the Invoice_Line_Items table to just Line_ltems. As a result, the shorter name can be used to refer to the invoice_id column of the table in the join condition. Although you can use this technique when you code a query, most programmers use abbreviations of the table names

to the invoice_id column of the table in the join condition. Although you can use this technique when you code a query, most programmers use abbreviations of the table names as shown in the first example and throughout the rest of this chapter. After you assign a table alias, you must use the alias in ,place of the original table name throughout the query. Otherwise, MySQL returns an error message instead of a result set.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data f rom two or m.ore tables 117 The syntax for an inner join that uses table aliases SELECT select_ list FROM table_ l al [INNER] JOIN table_ 2 a2 ON al.colwnn_ name operator a2.colwnn_name [[INNER] JOIN table_ 3 a3 ON a2.colwnn_ name operator a3.colwnn_name] ••• Aliases for all tables SELECT invoice_number, vendor_name, invoice_due_date, invoice_ total - payment_total - credit total AS balance due FROM vendors v JOIN invoices i ON v.vendor_ id = i.vendor_ id WHERE invoice_total - payment_total - credit total> 0 ORDER BY invoice_due_date DESC invoice_nurnber vendor _name invoice_due_date balance_due ► 547480102 Blue Cross 2018-08-31 224.00 0-2436 Malloy Lithographing Inc 2018-08-30 10976.06 9982nl Ford Motor Crecfrt Company 2018-08-23 503. 20 P-0608 Malloy Lithographing Inc 2018-08-22 19351.18 (11 rows) An alias for only one table SELECT invoice_n.11mhAr, line_ item_ amnunt, line_ item_description FROM invoices JOIN invoice_line_ items line_ items ON invoices.invoice id= line items.invoice id WHERE account_number = 540 ORDER BY invoice date f invoice_number line item amount line j tern_ desoiption - - ► m211-001 478.00 Pubftshers Marketing 972110 207. 78 Prospect

items.invoice id WHERE account_number = 540 ORDER BY invoice date f invoice_number line item amount line j tern_ desoiption - - ► m211-001 478.00 Pubftshers Marketing 972110 207. 78 Prospect &st 133560 175-.00 Card deck advertising 197/522 765.13 Catalog design (6 rows ) Description • A table cilias is an alternative table name assigned in the FROM clause. You can use an alias, which is typically just a letter or two, to make a SQL statement easier to code and read. • If you assign an alias to a table, you must use that alias to refer to the table throughout your query. You can't use the original table name. • You ca11 use an alias for one table in a join without using an alias for another table. Figure 4-2 How to use table aliases L V 1

118 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL How to join to a table in another database If you use the procedure described in appendix A (Windows) or appendix B (macOS) of this book to create the databases for this book, all of the tables are organized into three databases, which are also known as sche,nas. First, all tables pertaining to accounts payable such as the Vendors and Invoices tables are stored in the database, or schema, named AP. Then, all tables pertaining to order management are stored in a database named OM. Finally, all tables that are used by the smaller examples presented in this book are stored in a database named EX. When you use MySQL Workbench to run a query against a database, you don't need to qualify any table name with its database name. For example, when you run a query against the AP database, you don't need to qualify the Vendors table with the name of the database. However, you may occasionally need to join to a table that's in another database. To do that, you

need to qualify the Vendors table with the name of the database. However, you may occasionally need to join to a table that's in another database. To do that, you must qualify the table name in the other database by prefixing the table name with the database name. For example, let's say you need to join the Vendors table in the AP database with the Customers table in the OM database. To do that, you need to qualify the Customers table with the name of the database as shown in figt1re 4-3.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data from two or m.ore tables 119 The syntax of a table name that's qualified with a database name database_name.table_ name Join to a table in another database SELECT vendor_ name, customer_ last_ name, customer_ first_ name, vendor_state AS state, vendor_city AS city FROM vendors v JOIN om.customers c ON v.vendor_ zip_code = c.customer_ zip ORDER BY state, city ~ vendor name rustomer _last_name rustomer first name Wells Fa~go Bank - - Marissa Kyle Azteklabel Irvin Ania Zylka Design Holbrooke Rashad Lou Gentile's Flower Basket Damien Deborah Costco Neftaly Thalia Costco Ho!brooke Rashad Shields Design Damien Deborah Wakefield Co Holbrooke Rashad Wakefield Co Neftaly Thaffa Gary McKeighan Insl.l' ance Neftaly Thalia Gary Mc:Keighan lnsllance Holbrooke Rashad Digital Dreamwori<s Neftaly Thaffa (37 rows) Description state city Al. Phoenix CA Anaheim CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno CA Fresno • A MySQL server can store tables in multiple databases. These databases are sometimes refe1Ted to as schemas. • When you run a SELECT statement against

CA Fresno CA Fresno • A MySQL server can store tables in multiple databases. These databases are sometimes refe1Ted to as schemas. • When you run a SELECT statement against one database, you can join to a table in another database if you have appropriate privileges. To do that, you must prefix the table name in the other database with the name of that database. Figure 4-3 How to join to a table in another database

## Common Mistakes

120 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL How to use compound join conditions Although a join condition typically consists of a single comparison, you can include two or more co1nparisons in a join condition using the AND and OR operators. Figure 4-4 shows how this works. The query in tllis figure uses the AND operator to return the frrst and last names of all customers in the Customers table whose frrst and last names also exist in the Employees table. Since Thomas Hardy is the only name that exists in both tables, this is the only row that's returned in the result set for this query.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data from two or m.ore tables The Customers table rustomerJd rustomer _last_name rustomer _first_name customer _address rustomer _city rustomer _state "" ► 1 Anders Maria 345WinchellPI 2 Trujillo Ana 1298 E Smathers St 3 Moreno Antonio 6925 N Parkland Ave 4 Hardy Thomas 83 d'Urberville Ln 5 Berglund Christina 22717E 73rd Ave 6 Moos Hanna 1778 N Bovine Ave 7 Citeaux Fred 1234Main St < (24 rows) The Employees table employeejd last_name first_name department_JlUJTiber managerJd ► 1 Smith Cindy 2. OOJ◄I 2 Jones 8mer 4 1 3 Simonian Ralph 2 2. 4 Hernandez Olivia 1 9 5 Aaronsen Robert 2. 4 6 Watson Denise 6 8 7 Hardy Thomas 5 2 (9 rows) An inner join with two conditions SELECT customer_first_ name, customer_ last_name FROM customers c JOIN employees e ON c.customer first name= e.first_ name AND c.customer_ last_name = e.last_name rustomer _first_name rustomer last name - - --+-- ► Thomas Hardy (1 row) Description Anderson IN Benton AR Puyaftup 'vVA Casterbridge GA Dubuque IA Peona IL Normal IL • A join condition can include

name - - --+-- ► Thomas Hardy (1 row) Description Anderson IN Benton AR Puyaftup 'vVA Casterbridge GA Dubuque IA Peona IL Normal IL • A join condition can include two or more conditions connected by AND or OR operators. Figure 4-4 How to use compound join conditions L 'V > 121

## Related Concepts

- [inner-join](./inner-join.md)
- [outer-join](./outer-join.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `joins` `tables`
