# Using MySQL Workbench

🟢 **Difficulty:** Beginner
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 35 minutes

## Overview

How to use MySQL Workbench for database development and administration

📖 *Source: Page 62, Page 63, Page 64, Page 65, Page 66, Page 67, Page 68, Page 69, Page 70, Page 71, Page 72, Page 73, Page 74, Page 75, Page 76, Page 77, Page 78*

## Definition

42 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL An introduction to MySQL Workbench MySQL Workbench is a free graphical tool that makes it easy to work with MySQL. We recommend using this tool as you work through this book. This chapter shows how to work with version 8.0. However, with some minor varia- tions, the skills presented in this chapter should work for later versions as well. The Home page of MySQL Workbench When you start MySQL Workbench, it displays its Home page as shown in figure 2-1. This page is divided into three tabs: Welcome, Models, and Migration. The MySQL Connections section of the Welcome tab contains links that you can t1se to open a connection to a MySQL server. Then, you can use that connection to code and run SQL statements. By default, this tab contains one connection that allows you to connect as the root user to a MySQL server that's running on the local computer. In this book, this is the only connection you will need. However, if necessary, you can click the (±) icon to the

MySQL server that's running on the local computer. In this book, this is the only connection you will need. However, if necessary, you can click the (±) icon to the right of MySQL Connections to create other connections. The Welcome tab also contains links to MySQL Workbench documentation, blogs, and forums. This book doesn't show how to use these links, but you may find them useft1l, especially after you have learned the basic skills for working with MySQL that are described in this book. The Models tab contains links that let you create a database diagram from a type of data model known as an BER model. You can also use this tab to open existing BER models or to create new ones. Then, you can work with BER diagrams that correspond with these models. To learn more about this, you can read chapter 10. You can return to the Home page by clicking on the tab with the house icon on it near the top left comer of the Workbench window. In this figure, the Home tab is the

Home page by clicking on the tab with the house icon on it near the top left comer of the Workbench window. In this figure, the Home tab is the only tab that's shown, but you'll see some other tabs in the next few figures.

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools 43 The Home page of MySQL Workbench Iii MysQL Workbench □ X File Edit View Database Tools Scnpbng Help Welcome to MySQL Workbench MySQL Workbench is the official graphical user interface {GUI) tool for MySQL It allows you to design, create and browse your database schemas, work with database objects and insert data as well as design and run SQL queries to work with stored data. You can also migrate schemas and data from other database vendors to your MySQL database. Browse Docun,entation > MySQL Connections (±) © Local instance MySQL80 root localhost3306 Read the Blog > Discuss on the Forums > ~ Filter connections Description • The Home page of MySQL Workbench is divided into three tabs displayed at the left side of the window: Welcome, Models, and Migration. • You can use the MySQL Connections section of the Welcome tab to start and stop the database server and to code and run SQL statements. • You can use the links on the Welcome tab to view the

the Welcome tab to start and stop the database server and to code and run SQL statements. • You can use the links on the Welcome tab to view the documentation for using MySQL Workbench, view the MySQL Workbench blog, and view and join in the MySQL Workbench forum. • You can use the Models tab to create and work with EER models. • You can use the Migration tab to migrate other databases to MySQL and to copy a database from one instance of MySQL to another. • You can return to the Home page by clicking the tab with the house icon. This tab is always displayed in the top left corner of the Workbench window. Note • In so1ne cases, you'll get an ''Unsupported Operating System'' 1nessage when you start MySQL Workbench. This happens, for example, when you start MySQL Workbench 8.0 on Wmdows 7. If you click the OK button when this message is displayed, MySQL Workbench should work fine. This is a known bug that should be fixed in a future release of Workbench. Figure

click the OK button when this message is displayed, MySQL Workbench should work fine. This is a known bug that should be fixed in a future release of Workbench. Figure 2-1 The Home page of MySQL Workbench X

44 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to open a database connection Before you can work with a database, you need to connect to the database server. When you start MySQL Workbench, the MySQL Connections section displays a list of saved connections. By default, MySQL Workbench has one saved connection in this list. This connection is named ''Local instance MySQL80'', and it connects as the root user to a MySQL server that's running on port 3306 of the local host computer. (This assumes that you're using MySQL version 8.0. If you're using another version, the number at the end of the connection name will be different.) Since this is what you want when you 're frrst getting started, you typically use this connection to connect to the server. To do that, click the connection and enter the password for the root user if you 're prompted for it. If you installed MySQL Workbench following the directions in appendix A (Windows) or B (macOS), the password for the root user is ''sesame80." Figure 2-2 shows the dialog box that MySQL

you installed MySQL Workbench following the directions in appendix A (Windows) or B (macOS), the password for the root user is ''sesame80." Figure 2-2 shows the dialog box that MySQL Workbench displays to prompt for a password. This dialog box shows that it's attempting to use the root user to connect to a MySQL server running on port 3306 of the local host. In addition to entering a password in this dialog box, you can select the ''Save password in vault'' option to save the password so you don't have to enter it every time you connect to this server. Then, if you ever want to clear the password from the vault, you can right-click the connection, select the Edit Connection item, and click the Clear button. If you need to connect as another user, or if you need to connect to a MySQL server running on a different computer, you can use MySQL Workbench to edit the connection parameters for a connection. To do that, right-click the connection and select the Edit Connections item. This displays a dialog box

you can use MySQL Workbench to edit the connection parameters for a connection. To do that, right-click the connection and select the Edit Connections item. This displays a dialog box that lets you specify the parameters for the connection such as the usemame, hostname, and port number. If you want to add a new connection to the Home tab, you can click the ® icon to the right of MySQL Connections, enter a name for the connection, and specify the parameters for the connection. Then, this connection appears in the list of connections, and you can click it to use it.

## Explanation

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools 45 The dialog box for opening database connections MySQL Workbench D X File &!rt V.t!!N Database Toots Sonpbng Help Welcome to MySQL Workbench i1 Connect II' t,Ay'> - [ Servtr MySQL Workbench I create and brows design and run SQL q -- \ rT1 Browse Docuri MySQL Connections @ © Local instance MySQLSO Description root localhosn3306 Please enter password for the following service: Service: Mysql~t3306 User: root Password: D Save password In vaut I OK I cance allows you to design. ert data as well as as and data from other the Forums> o. filter connections • To connect as the root user to an instance of MySQL that's running on the local host computer, click the stored connection named ''Local instance MySQL80'', and enter the password for the root user if prompted. • To save the password for a connection so you don't have to enter it every time, check the ''Save password in vault'' option when you 're prompted fo1· your password. • To clear the password

a connection so you don't have to enter it every time, check the ''Save password in vault'' option when you 're prompted fo1· your password. • To clear the password from the vault so you are prompted for your password, right-click the connection, select the Edit Connection item, click the Clear button for the password, and click the Close button. • To edit the connection parameters for a connection, right-click the connection, select the Edit Connection item, enter the connection parameters, and click the Close button. This lets you specify the usemame, the host address, the port number, and other connection parameters. • To add a new connection to the Welcome tab of the Home page, click the (±) icon to the right of MySQL Connections, enter the connection pararneters, and click the OK button. Then, the connection appears in the list of connections. Figure 2-2 How to open a database connection X

46 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to start and stop the database server If you installed MySQL on your computer as described in appendix A (Windows) or B (1nacOS), the database server starts automatically when you start your computer. This piece of software is sometimes refe1red to as the database service or database engine. It receives SQL statements that are passed to it, processes them, and returns the results. Before you can work with a MySQL database, the database server must be started. To check whether the MySQL database server is running on your computer, you can use the Startup/Shutdown option of MySQL Workbench as shown in figure 2-3. Then, if the server isn't already running, you can start it by clicking on the Start Server button. When you do that, MySQL Workbench displays a message that indicates the status of the MySQL server, and it displays the Stop Server button. You may also want to stop the database server from time to time. For example, you can stop the server if you aren't going to be using

Stop Server button. You may also want to stop the database server from time to time. For example, you can stop the server if you aren't going to be using it and you want to free the resources on yotrr compt1ter. Or, you can stop the server if the port that is being used by the MySQL database server conflicts with another program. Then, when you want to work with the database server again, you can start it. The easiest way to stop the database server is to use the Stop Server button that's available from the Startup/Shutdown option of the Navigator window of MySQL Workbench as described in this figure. When you click this button, MySQL Workbench displays a message when the MySQL server has success- fully stopped, and it displays the Start Server button. When you're running the MySQL database server on your own computer for training purposes, you can stop the database server whenever you want. However, if a database server is running in a production environment, you should make sure that all users are logged off

you can stop the database server whenever you want. However, if a database server is running in a production environment, you should make sure that all users are logged off and that no applications are using the database server before you stop it.

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools The Startup/Shutdown option of MySQL Workbench fil MySQL Workbench D 6 local instance MySOl.80 ,c File Edit V.t!N Oueiy Database Seiver Tools Scnpbng Help MANAGEMtNT 0 Server Status - .J. Client Connections .J. Users and PrMleoes (........- e Status and System Variables .!i Data Ellport .!, Data Import/Restore INSTANCE '-"!I 0 Startup / Shutdown A Server log.s /' Options File PERFORMANCE C Dashboard 8'J Performance Reports €" Performance Schema Sdup Adm,nrrtrman Schemas lnformabon No ob)ect selected ObJed lr.fo Ses_sron Connertlon ~opened. Local nstancr MySQU!O Startup / Shutdown MySQL Server The database~ Is sUJlll)ed, To start the Server, use the 'Start Server•button The database server rnstance rs ~= Slart Server If you stop the server, neither you nor your appkallons can use the d"t:abase and al a.rent aimections wl be do5ed • 2018· 11-01 11: 36: ,;a · WoridJench 'I'll use and slid commands to start/stop thrs rns1ance 2018·11-01 U:36:48 ·Sever rsn.rnio FROM /IJ'4t-E.·21ll5-K.err: 2018·U-01T18:37:'\2 o Sysll!m) (MY-013105} [Server C:'frcvarn Fles\'-1ySQt.'f-1ySQl Server 8.0~',nysqld.exe: Normal srotdom. 2018-11-01T 18:37:44 o Wal'nl'lgj (MY-O

use and slid commands to start/stop thrs rns1ance 2018·11-01 U:36:48 ·Sever rsn.rnio FROM /IJ'4t-E.·21ll5-K.err: 2018·U-01T18:37:'\2 o Sysll!m) (MY-013105} [Server C:'frcvarn Fles\'-1ySQt.'f-1ySQl Server 8.0~',nysqld.exe: Normal srotdom. 2018-11-01T 18:37:44 o Wal'nl'lgj (MY-O 10909) [Server C: 'f'r.ogram Aes'f,lySQL 'f,1ySQt Server 8,0'bwlynysqld.exe: Faong dooe of t!Tead 27 user: 'root', 201S·l1-0IT18:37:'14 O WarnlnO] (MY-010909} [Server C:'f'raoram Fles't1ySQL'M}'SQl Server 8.0lp,n'mysqld.exe: l'«dnlJ close of t!Yead 28 user: 'root'. 2018·11-01 U :37:50 -Server stop done. FROM ANl-1:-2015-K.err: 20l8·.U-01Tl8:37:'19 0 Syste11) (MY-010910} [Server C:'f'rao,arnFtles'f,1ySQl.'MySQl Server 8.0'p,'fnysqld.e~ S!Mdowncomplete (mysqld 8.0. 13) MySQl Comml.nty Server · GPl. 2018-11-01 11137:52 •ChecldnoseM!f status. .. 2018·1!-0I U:37:52 • MySQI. ser,er is CIJITently ru-ri,g 2018-11-01 U:-37:52 • Trying ta aimed ID MySQl ... 2018·11-0l U:37:52 -Can'taimect ID MySQl ser,er on 'loallost' (10061) {2003) 2018·11-0l 11:37:52 -~ server rs notnn,fng 2018-11-01 11:37:52 -Chedcng serve- status ... 2018-11-0 l 11: 37: 52 • Tryr,o ID connect ID MySQl ... Ren-esh Status Clear- Messages Copy ID Q:t>oard How to stop and start the database server 1. Display the Welcome tab of the MySQL Workbench Home page. 2. Click the connection to the local server. This should connect you

to stop and start the database server 1. Display the Welcome tab of the MySQL Workbench Home page. 2. Click the connection to the local server. This should connect you to the local MySQL server as the root user. If necessary, enter the password for the root user. 3. In the Navigator window, if necessary, click on the Administration tab. Then, select the Startup/Shutdown option from the Instance category. 4. Click the Stop Server button to stop the database server. Or, click the Start Server button to start it. Description • After you install MySQL, the database server usually starts automatically each ti1ne you start your computer. • The database server can also be referred to as the database service or the database • engine. • If you aren't able to use Workbench to start and stop the database server, you may need to edit your connection so it points to the correct instance of MySQL. To do that, right-click the connection on the Welco1ne tab of the Home page, select the Edit Connection item, click the System Profile tab,

to the correct instance of MySQL. To do that, right-click the connection on the Welco1ne tab of the Home page, select the Edit Connection item, click the System Profile tab, and edit the service name. For MySQL 8.0 on Windows, the service name is typically ''MySQL80''. Figure 2-3 How to start and stop the database server X 47

48 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to navigate through the database objects After you connect to a database server, you can use the Schemas category of the Navigator window to navigate through the database objects in the databases on the server, as shown in figure 2-4. As you can see, these objects include tables, views, stored procedures, and functions. For this chapter, however, you can focus on the tables. Later in this book, you'll learn more about views, stored procedures, and functions. In this figure, I double-clicked the node for the AP database (schema) in the Schemas tab of the Navigator window to select it and view the database objects it contains (tables, views, stored procedures, and functions). Then, I expanded the Tables node to view all of the tables in the AP database. To work with a node or an object, you can right-click it to display a context-sensitive menu. Then, you can select a command from that menu. For example, you can right-click the node for the AP database to display a list of commands for

a context-sensitive menu. Then, you can select a command from that menu. For example, you can right-click the node for the AP database to display a list of commands for working with that database.

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools 49 The tables available for the AP database II MysQL Workbench A local instance MySOL80 ,c File Edit V.t!N Oue,y o~tabase Server Tools Scnpbng Help SOifM ~AS _____ 6~ .. o e 1 , ti n 1 ~ 1 q, I F~ter objects "' U ap • Tables ► Ill oeneralJedger_a,counts ► El lnvoice_archlve ► El ,nvoiceJ,ne_ltems ► ■ Invoices ► m tenns ► Ii vendor_conracts ► II vendor.: Vi~'S ~ Stored Procedures 'al Functions ► el( ► om ► sys AdnunlstratJon Sche_mas lnforr-at.on ffo obJect srlected 1 ~ J Lrito 1000rov.'S • I '4i, I '<I Q. D X > OW...,,. / Ft<ch Ob,e<t Info Secss,on Description • Each database (or sche,na) provides access to the database objects that are available. These database objects include tables, views, stored procedures, and functions. • On some systems, the Navigator window provides Administration and Schemas tabs that you can use to display the Administration and Schemas categories. On other systems, the Navigator window displays the Administration category above the Schemas category.

provides Administration and Schemas tabs that you can use to display the Administration and Schemas categories. On other systems, the Navigator window displays the Administration category above the Schemas category. • To display the databases for the current connection, you can use the Navigator window to view the Schemas category. • To navigate through the database objects for a database, click the arrows to the left of each of the nodes in the Navigator window to expand or collapse the node. • To work with a node or an object, right-click the node or object and select a command from the resulting menu. Figure 2-4 How to navigate through the database objects

50 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to view and edit the data for a table To view the data for a table, you can right-click the table name and select the Select Rows - Limit 1000 command. In figure 2-5, for example, I selected this command for the Invoices table. This displayed the data for the table in a Result grid. In addition, it displayed information about the SELECT statement that was used to retrieve the data in the Output tab. To insert, edit, and delete the rows in the table, you can use the buttons at the top of the Result grid. Then, to apply the changes to the table, you can click the Apply button at the bottom of the Result grid. Or, if you want to cancel the changes, you can click the Revert button.

## Examples

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools The data for the Invoices table displayed in the Result grid Result grid II MysQL Workbench fl. Local instance MySQL80 x File Edit View Query Database Server Tools Scnp!Jng Help ~a, ,gator SCHEMAS Q. ,RI~ obJects ,, U a p • li!;l Tables Quayl Iii.I Q I f !if -Q. I 1 • SELECT • FROM ap.invoic_es; < rn I 1.m1 to 1000 rows · 1>() 1 □ ► ii general_ledger_acc_ounJS I Reult Grid l L1 t\. Fi1lel-11o1 .. , I 11 Edi, ~ Lb .J;> I Bci>o<t/1,nport, ~ Jwra,pCol<:cn.tw: u ► ill] lnvolce_archlve ► il!l ,nvoice_hne_,tems lnVOiee_id vendor_id lnll0ite _ nu:nber lnYOiee _date lnvOicr - total payment_total t_total terms_ld ► 0 lnvolces ► 1 122 989319-457 2018-0+-08 3813.33 3813.33 0.00 3 2018 ► Ill tenns 2 123 26lli32.41 2018.o+lO 40.20 40.10 0.00 3 2018 ► Q vendor_contacts 3 123 963253234 2018-0+13 138.75 138.75 0.00 3 2018< ► El vendor.; 4 123 2-000·299.3 201.8-0+16 144.70 i+l.70 0.00 3 2018< Vi~ 5 123 963253251 2018-0+16 15.50 15.50 0.00 3 2018<

123 963253234 2018-0+13 138.75 138.75 0.00 3 2018< ► El vendor.; 4 123 2-000·299.3 201.8-0+16 144.70 i+l.70 0.00 3 2018< Vi~ 5 123 963253251 2018-0+16 15.50 15.50 0.00 3 2018< ~ Stored Procedures 6 123 963253261 2018-0+16 '1275 42.75 o.oo 3 2018< ~ Functions 7 123 9632532.37 201.8-04-21 in.so in.so 0.00 3 2018-C ► ex 8 89 125520-1 2018-0+2'1 95.00 95.00 o.oo 1 2018< ► om 9 121 97/488 2018-04-24 601.95 601.95 o.oo 3 2018< ► sys < Adm,mstrabon Schenas ,nvolces 2 x O'l)C. " ijl .Action Output X Forni Eder Table: invoices Columns: jnyojcc id n t( 11) Al Fl< () 1 11 48:53 SELECT • FROM ap .n1101ees LIMIT 0. 1000 Oumion / F.ttt, 0.000 sec / 0 000 sec vendor_id 1nt{ll) nv01a_~ ,archN(5::) ~~tt,ttc ~(i,2) ~~~ta =~t~ Object ls>fo Session Description • To view the data for a table, right-click the table in the Navigator window and select the Select Rows - Limit 1000 comn1and to display it in a Result grid. • To edit the data for a table, view the data. Then, you can use

select the Select Rows - Limit 1000 comn1and to display it in a Result grid. • To edit the data for a table, view the data. Then, you can use the buttons at the top of the Result grid to insert, update, and delete rows. • To apply the changes to the table, click the Apply button at the bottom of the tab. To cancel the changes, click the Revert button. Figure 2-5 How to view and edit the data for a table 51

52 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to view and edit the column definitions for a table If you want to edit a column definition for a table, you can use the technique described in figure 2-6 to display the column definitions for the table. In this figure, for example, the column definitions for the Vendors table are displayed. At this point, you can view information about each column of the table such as its name and data type. Once you display the column definitions for a table, you can use the Columns tab to add a column, delete a column, or modify a column. For example, you can add a new column by entering it at the bottom of the list. You can delete a column by right-clicking on it and selecting the Delete command. You can change the name of a column by selecting the column and then clicking on the name and editing it. You can change the data type of a column by selecting the column and then clicking on its data type and selecting

then clicking on the name and editing it. You can change the data type of a column by selecting the column and then clicking on its data type and selecting another data type from the drop-down list that appears. And so on. Most of the time, you won't want to use MySQL Workbench to edit the column definitions for a table. Instead, you'll want to edit the scripts that create the database so you can easily recreate the database later. In chapter 11, you'll learn more about creating and modifying the column definitions for a table using both techniques.

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools The column definitions for the Vendors table 8 MySQL Workbench 6 Local insmnce MySQLSO X File Edit Vif!!N Query Database Senter Tools Scnptmo Help Que,y1 SCHEMAS Table Name: lvendc.-s J Sdtema: ap q, I RI~ ob)ects T .J ap Owset/Colation: utfBni>'l - v j utf8mb'1_0900_ v Engine: lmo06 T'cl Tables ► general_ledger_accounts ► fnvo1ce_archlve ► mvoice_lme_iteJT'6 ► Invokes ► te_rms ► II vendor_contacts T vendors ►[;:) Co lumns ► Ind!!RS ► ~ Fore:ion Keys ► Triggers Views storNI Procedures 'i!5J Functions ► ex ► om ► sys Administration ~as • for, uo Table: vendors Columns: lnt(ll) AIPK vardia va<cha varcha var cha char(2: Comments: CoumName vendor_id vendor_name J vendor _addressl ; vie_ndor _address2 vendor_dty vendor_sta2 vendor_zip_codt vendor_phone vendor_contact_last_name vie_ndor _contact_firsLname ~ ddault_terms_id ~ ddauft_account_number < Colum Name.: Charset/Cola6on: Comments: Datatype INT(U) VARCHAA(SO} VAACHAA(SO) VARCHAA(SO) VAACHAA(SO} CHAR{2) VARCHAA(20) VARCHAA(SO) VARCHAR(SO) VARCHAA(SO} !Nl{l 1) !Nl{U) PK l'-N UQ B ~ lF 0 0 D D D D D E2l E2I D D D D D D D D D □ D

VARCHAA(SO} !Nl{l 1) !Nl{U) PK l'-N UQ B ~ lF 0 0 D D D D D E2l E2I D D D D D D D D D □ D □ D D □ □ E2I □ □ □ □ □ E2I □ □ D □ □ 0 □ D D □ □ D D D D □ D D □ □ D □ □ D D □ D □ □ E2I □ □ D □ □ E2I □ D D □ Data Type: DefalJt: Starage: Virtual Primary Key Bnarv Autolncr~t vendor id vendor_naml! veocb _address! vendor _address2 vendc<_oty vendor _state vendor _zlp_code vendor _phone Vatchll varcha Colu111ns Indexes Foreign Keys Trfggers Partitioning Options varcha v Al E2l D D D D D D □ D D D D □ V .. G Oefault,bilresslon D D D D D □ □ D D D D D Sto,-ed NULL NULL NULL NULL NULL Notl'd Urtqie u~ aroMlf > ven<!or _contact_l!9!l'l_name Object Info Session Apply Revert Description • To view the column definitions for a table, right-click the table name in the

NULL NULL Notl'd Urtqie u~ aroMlf > ven<!or _contact_l!9!l'l_name Object Info Session Apply Revert Description • To view the column definitions for a table, right-click the table name in the Navigator window and select the Alter Table command. Then, select the Columns tab at the bottom of the window that's displayed to view the column definitions for the table. • To edit the column definitions for a table, view the column definitions. Then, you can t1se the resulting window to add new columns and modify and delete existing columns. • For more information about creating and modifying tables, see chapter 11. Figure 2-6 How to view and edit the column definitions X V 53

54 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to use MySQL Workbench to run SQL staten,ents Besides letting you review the design of a database, MySQL Workbench is a great tool for entering and running SQL statements. How to enter and execute a SQL statement When you first connect to a MySQL server in MySQL Workbench, a SQL Editor tab is automatically opened. Figure 2-7 shows how to use the SQL editor to enter and execute a SQL statement. The easiest way to open a SQL Editor tab is to click the Create New SQL Tab button in the SQL Editor toolbar or p1·ess the Ctrl+ T keys. Once you open a SQL tab, you can use standard techniques to enter or edit a SQL statement. As you enter statements, you'll notice that MySQL Workbench automatically applies colors to various elements. For example, it displays keywords in blue. This makes your state1nents easier to read and understand and can help you identify coding en·ors. To execute a single SQL statement like the one in this figure, you can press Ctrl+Enter

your state1nents easier to read and understand and can help you identify coding en·ors. To execute a single SQL statement like the one in this figure, you can press Ctrl+Enter or click the Execute Current Statement button in the SQL Editor toolbar. If the statement returns data, that data is displayed below the SQL editor in a corresponding Result grid. In this figure, for example, the result set returned by the SELECT statement is displayed. If necessary, you can adjust the height of the Result grid by dragging the bar that separates the SQL Editor tab from the Result grid. Before you execute a SQL statement, make sure you've selected a database by double-clicking the database in the Navigator window. Otherwise, you'll get an error message like this: Error Code: 1046. No database selected Similarly, if you haven't selected the co1Tect database, you'll get an error message that says the table doesn't exist. For exan1ple, if the EX database is selected when you attempt to retrieve data from the Vendors table, you' 11 get an error message like this: Error

table doesn't exist. For exan1ple, if the EX database is selected when you attempt to retrieve data from the Vendors table, you' 11 get an error message like this: Error Code: 1146. Table •ex.vendors' doesn't exist To fix this, you can double-click the AP database to select it.

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools A SELECT statement and its results Create New SQL Tab button 11 M orkbench 6 / wcat tns:tance MySQL.80 X Execute Current Statement button File 1 -1 V!e'N Query Database Saver T oals Sc · · no Help Query 1 X SQL editor SCHEMAS ~ I Fil~ ob]l!CIS ,, J ap u .,,. l"'"'I Umil to 100(hows • I 1-9 I ~ Q. l1l ~ • Tables ► Ell 9enual_led9l!l'_accounts ► iJ invoice_archlve ► El lnvoice_ll~_,t,ms ► ii Invoices ► terms ► el ve.ndor_contacts " El vendors ► t-1 Columns ► Indexes ► Foreigo Keys ►~Triggers Vi~ 'al Stored Procedures !?Ii Funrtlnn~ Adml11istrallon Sch~as ll'form.won Table: vendors Columns: vernlor ld vendor_name vendor _addressl vendor _address2 vt'fldor -dty vendor _state ... lnl{I I) AlPK vard,a varcha varc:ha varcha diar(2 "' l • SELECT vendor_naee, vendor_city, vendor_state 2 FR0'-1 vendors 3 ORDER 8Y ve ndor_nam~ < vendor_name ► Abbev 0~ F\lnlsmgs Amencan Booksde's Assoc American Elqlress ASC~ Ascom Hasler Maino Systems AT&T Aztekl.cbel Baker & Taylor Books Bertelsmam indus1Jy Svcs. Inc

ORDER 8Y ve ndor_nam~ < vendor_name ► Abbev 0~ F\lnlsmgs Amencan Booksde's Assoc American Elqlress ASC~ Ascom Hasler Maino Systems AT&T Aztekl.cbel Baker & Taylor Books Bertelsmam indus1Jy Svcs. Inc 6fl tndUstrles Bil Jon6 Bil Marvn Electnc Inc Blanchartf & Johnson Associates Bkietross Blue Shield of California Bouche,- Cwmncabons Inc earners Pub\shino ~v Cal State Termite vendor_dty Fresno Tarrytown vendor _state CA NY Los Angdes CA Fresno Sheltot'I Phoenix Anahesn Owtotte Valenoa Fresno CA CT A1. CA NC CA CA Sacrament!> CA Fresno CA Mssion Viejo CA ())cnard CA Mahe.Tl CA FortWashi... PA Tuel.ala! m Selma CA Fresno CA Result grid D X □ ... "' Feld Tvi- > ObJect Info Session Califumia Business Machines vendors 1 >< 0 ReadOnly Description • To open a new SQL tab, press Ctrl+T or click the Create New SQL Tab button ( ) in the SQL Editor toolbar. • To select the current database, double-click it in the Schemas tab of the Navigator window. This displays the selected database in bold. • To enter a SQL statement, type it into the SQL editor.

database, double-click it in the Schemas tab of the Navigator window. This displays the selected database in bold. • To enter a SQL statement, type it into the SQL editor. • As you enter the text for a statement, the SQL editor applies color to various elements, such as SQL keywords, to make them easy to identify. • To execute a SQL statement, press Ctrl+Enter or click the Execute Current Statement button ({if) in the SQL Editor toolbar. If the statement retrieves data, the data is displayed in a Result grid below the SQL tab. Figure 2-7 How to enter and execute a SOL statement 55

## Common Mistakes

56 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to use snippets You can think of the srzippets that come with MySQL Workbench as a library of SQL syntax. This library is divided into statements that you can use to manage a database, define objects in a database, and manipulate the data in a database. You can also create your own snippets that provide custom code. In fact, you're more likely to create your own snippets than you are to use the built-in snippets. That's because the syntax that's provided for the bt1ilt-in snippets is much more complex than what you typically need. Figure 2-8 shows how to use snippets. To start, if the SQL Additions window isn't displayed, you can display it by clicking on the rightmost button at the 1ight side of the SQL Editor tab. Then, you can display the snippets tab and use the drop-down list at the top of the tab to select a category of snippets. In this figUI·e, for example, the My Snippets category is displayed. From here, you can select a snippet and

the top of the tab to select a category of snippets. In this figUI·e, for example, the My Snippets category is displayed. From here, you can select a snippet and then click the Insert Snippet button to enter the snippet into the SQL Editor tab. Finally, you can edit the snippet code so it's appropriate for your SQL statement. In this figure, the snippet contains code that I wrote for joining the vendors, invoices, and invoice_line_items tables. To create this snippet, I entered it into a SQL Editor tab and then clicked the Add New Snippet button. By saving this statement as a snippet, I can now use it anytime I want to join these tru·ee tables instead of having to type it each time. For now, don't wo1Ty if you don't understand the SQL statement p1·esented in this figure. The main point is that you can use the Snippets tab to save and retrieve a variety of SQL code. As you learn more about SQL statements, you'll see how useful this can be.

Cliapter 2 How to use MySQL Workbench and other develop,nent tools 57 The SQL Additions tab with a snippet created by a user ■ MysQL Workbench A Local instance MySQLSO x File Edit View Query Database Server Tools Scnptmg Help q_ 11,ter objects • @ ap ►~Tables V,ev.-s '5l Stored Procedures 'al Functions ► ex ► om ► sys Description SQl ~dd1i:Jons Q Q I f' W ~ I~ I lmlto 1000rows • I ..(> I My~s 1 ♦ SELECT a 2 fRCf'I vendor-s v 3 JOIII invoices i 4 OIi v. vendor id % i. vendor id - - 5 JOill invoice_line_iteflls li 6 OH i. invoice id = li. invoice id - - 0 X • The SQL Additions window contains context help and snippets. Snippets contain the syntax for many common SQL statements. You can use the snippets to guide you as you create a SQL statement. You can also create your own snippets and save them for later use. • The SQL Additions window is displayed to the right of the SQL Editor tab by default.

You can also create your own snippets and save them for later use. • The SQL Additions window is displayed to the right of the SQL Editor tab by default. If this window isn't displayed, you can display it by clicking the rightmost button (□) at the right side of the SQL Editor toolbar. Then, you can click the Snippets tab to display the available snippets. • The snippets are organized into categories. To display any category of snippets, select the category from the drop-down list at the top of the Snippets tab. • To enter a snippet into a SQL editor, select the snippet and then click the Insert Snippet button (~ at the top of the Snippets tab. Then, edit the snippet code so it's appropriate for your SQL statement. • To replace code in the SQL editor with a snippet, select the code, select the snippet you want to replace it with, and then click the Replace Current Text button ( ~ ). • To create your own snippet, enter the code for the snippet into a

want to replace it with, and then click the Replace Current Text button ( ~ ). • To create your own snippet, enter the code for the snippet into a SQL editor tab. Then, select the category where you want to save the snippet, click the Save Snippet button ( 1-¢) in the SQL Editor toolbar, and enter a name for the snippet. • To delete a snippet, right-click it in the Snippets tab and select the Delete Snippet item. Figure 2-8 How to use the Snippets tab

58 Section 1 Arz introduction to MySQL How to handle syntax errors If an error occurs during the execution of a SQL statement, MySQL Workbench displays a message that includes the error numbe1· and a brief description of the error. In figure 2-9, for example, the message displays an error number of 1146 and a brief description that says ''Table ap.vendor doesn't exist." In this example, the problem is that the Vendor table doesn't exist in the database. To fix the problem, you need to edit the SQL statement so the table is Vendors instead of Vendor. Then, you should be able to successfully run the SQL statement. This figure also lists some other common causes of errors. As you can see, most e1Tors are caused by incorrect syntax. However, it's also common to get an error if you have selected the wrong database. If, for example, you have selected the EX database and you try to run a statement that refers to tables in the AP database, you will get an error. Regardless of what's causing the problem, you

the EX database and you try to run a statement that refers to tables in the AP database, you will get an error. Regardless of what's causing the problem, you can usually identify and correct the problem without much trouble. In some cases, though, it may be diffict1lt to figure out the cause of an error. Then, you can usually get more information about the error by searching the Internet or by searching the MySQL Reference Manual as described later in this chapter.

## Related Concepts

- [relational-databases](./relational-databases.md)

---

**Tags:** `mysql` `workbench` `tools`
