# Normalization

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 40 minutes

## Overview

Organizing data to reduce redundancy and improve integrity

📖 *Source: Page 332, Page 333, Page 334, Page 335, Page 336, Page 337, Page 338, Page 339*

## Definition

312 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How to identify the tables and assign columns Figure 10-4 presents the three main entities for the accounts payable system and lists the possible data elements that can be associated with each one. In most cases, you'll recognize the main entities that need to be included in a data structure as you identify the data elements. As I reviewed the data elements represented on the invoice document in figure 10-2, for example, I identified the three entities shown in this figure: vendors, invoices, and invoice line items. Although you may identify additional entities later on in the design process, it's sufficient to identity the main entities at this point. These entities will become the tables of the database. After you identify the main entities, you need to determine which data elements are associated with each entity. These elements will become the columns of the tables. In many cases, the associations are obvious. For example, it's easy to determine that the vendor name and address are associated with the vendors entity and the invoice

the tables. In many cases, the associations are obvious. For example, it's easy to determine that the vendor name and address are associated with the vendors entity and the invoice date and invoice total are associated with the invoices entity. Some associations, however, aren't so obvious. In that case, you may need to list a data element under two or more entities. In this figure, for example, you can see that the invoice number is included in both the invoices and invoice line items entities and the account number is included in all three entities. Later, when you normalize the data structure, you may be able to remove these repeated elements. For now, though, it's okay to include them. Before I go on, I want to point out the notation I used in this figure. To start, any data elements I included that weren't identified in previous steps are shown in italics. Although you should be able to identify most of the data elements in the first two steps of the design process, you'll occasionally think of additional elements during

in italics. Although you should be able to identify most of the data elements in the first two steps of the design process, you'll occasionally think of additional elements during the third step. In this case, since the initial list of data elements was based on a single document, I added several data elements to this list. Similar·ly, you may decide during this step that you don't need some of the data elements you've identified. For example, I decided that I didn't need the fax number or web address of each vendor. So I used the strikethrough feature of my word processor to indicate that these data elements should not be included. Finally, I identifie.d the data elements that are included in two or more tables by coding an asterisk after them. Although you can use any notation you like for this step of the design process, you'll want to be sure that you document your design decisions. For a complicated. design, you will probably want to use a CASE ( computer-aided software engineering) tool. By the way, a couple

be sure that you document your design decisions. For a complicated. design, you will probably want to use a CASE ( computer-aided software engineering) tool. By the way, a couple of the new data elements I added may not be clear to you if you haven't worked with a corporate accounts payable system before. ''Terms'' refers to the payment terms that the ve11dor offers. For example, the terms might be net 30 (the invoice must be paid in 30 days) or might include a discount for early payment. ''Account number'' refers to tl1e general ledger accounts that a company uses to track its expenses. For example, one account number might be assigned for advertising expenses, while another might be for office supplies. Each invoice that's paid is assigned to an account, and in some cases, different line items on an invoice are assigned to different accounts.

Chapter 10 Hovv to design a database 313 Possible tables and columns for an accounts payable system Vendors Invoices Invoice line items Vendor name Vendor address Vendor city Vendor state Vendor zip code Vendor phone number Vendor fax nutuber Vendor web address Vendor contact first name Vendor contact last name 'Vendor contact phone Vendor AR first name Vendor AR last name Vendor AR phone Terms* Account number* Description Invoice number* Invoice number* Invoice date Item part number Terms* Item quantity Invoice total Item description Payment date Item unit price Paymerit total Item extension Invoice due date Accoun.t nu,nber* Credit total Sequence number Accoi,nt number* • After you identify and subdivide all of the data elements for a database, you should group them by the entities with which they're associated. These entities will later become the tables of the database, and the elements will become the columns. • If a data element relates to more than one entity, you can include it under all of the entities it relates to. Then, when you normalize the database, you may be able to

element relates to more than one entity, you can include it under all of the entities it relates to. Then, when you normalize the database, you may be able to remove the duplicate elements. • As you assign the elements to entities, you should omit elements that aren't needed, and you should add any additional elements that are needed. The notation used in this figure • Data elements that were previously identified but aren't needed are crossed out. • Data elements that were added are displayed in italics. • Data elements that are related to two or more entities are followed by an asterisk. • You can use a similar notation or develop one of your own. You can also use a CASE ( computer-aided software engineering) tool if one is available to you. Figure 10-4 How to identify the tables and assign columns

314 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How to identify the primary and foreign keys Once you identify the entities and data elements of a system, the next step is to identify the relationships between the tables. To do that, you need to identify the primary and foreign keys as shown in figure 10-5. As you know, a primary key is used to uniquely identify each row in a table. In some cases, you can use an existing column as the primary key. For example, you might consider using the vendor_name column as the primary key of the Vendors table. Because the values for this column can be long, however, and because it would be easy to enter a value like that incorrectly, that's not a good candidate for a primary key. Instead, you should use an ID column like vendor_id that's incremented by one for each new row. Similarly, you 1night consider using the invoice_number column as the primary key of the Invoices table. However, it's possible for different vendors to use the same invoice number, so this value

you 1night consider using the invoice_number column as the primary key of the Invoices table. However, it's possible for different vendors to use the same invoice number, so this value isn't necessarily unique. Becat1se of that, another ID column like invoice_id can be used as the primary key. To uniquely identify the rows in the Invoice_Line_Items table, this design uses a composite key. This composite key uses two columns to identify each row. The first column is the invoice_id column from the Invoices table, and the second column is the invoice_sequence column. This is necessary because this table may contain more than one row (line item) for each invoice. And that means that the invoice_id value by itself may not be unique. After you identify the primary key of each table, you need to identify the relationships between the tables and add foreign key columns as necessary. In most cases, two tables will have a one-to-many relationship with each other. For example, each vendor can have many invoices, and each invoice can have many line items. To identify the vendor

two tables will have a one-to-many relationship with each other. For example, each vendor can have many invoices, and each invoice can have many line items. To identify the vendor that each invoice is associated with, a vendor_id column is included in the Invoices table. Because the Invoice_Line_Items table already contains an invoice_id column, it's not neces- sary to add another column to this table. The diagram at the top of this figure illustrates the relationships I identified between the tables in the accounts payable system. As you can see, the primary keys are displayed in bold. Then, the lines between the tables indicate how the primary key in one table is related to the foreign key in another table. Here, a small, round connector indicates the ''one'' side of the relationship, and the triangular connector indicates the ''many'' side of the relationship. In addition to the one-to-many relationships shown in this diagram, you can also use many-to-many relationships and one-to-one relationships. The second diagram in this figure, for example, shows a many-to-many relation- ship between an Employees table and

in this diagram, you can also use many-to-many relationships and one-to-one relationships. The second diagram in this figure, for example, shows a many-to-many relation- ship between an Employees table and a Committees table. As you can see, this type of relationship can be implemented by creating a linking table, also called a connecting table or an associate table. This table contains the primary key columns from the two tables. Then, each table has a one-to-many relationship with the linking table. Notice that the linking table doesn't have its own primary key. Because this table doesn't correspond to an entity and because it's used only in conjunction with the Employees and Committees tables, a primary key isn't needed.

## Explanation

Chapter 10 Hovv to design a database 315 The relationships between the tables in the accounts payable system vendors • • 1nvo1ces invoice line items - - vendor id invoice id ••---- ◄ invoice id - - - vendor name - vendor address - vendor_ city vendor state - vendor_zip_code vendor_phone vendor contact first name - - - vendor contact last name - - - terms account no - i.-..a vendor id - invoice number - invoice date - invoice total - payment_total credit total - terms invoice due date - - payment_date account no - Two tables with a many-to-many relationship employees memberships committees . . 1nvo1ce_sequence account no - line _item_ description item_quantity item_ unit_price line item amount - - employee_id ••---- ◄ employee_id first name committee id committee id committee name - - - last name - Linking table Two tables with a one-to-one relationship employees employee _photos employee_id ••--• employee_id first_name employee_photo last name - Description • Each table should have a primary key that uniquely identifies each row. If possible, you should use an existing

_photos employee_id ••--• employee_id first_name employee_photo last name - Description • Each table should have a primary key that uniquely identifies each row. If possible, you should use an existing column for the primary key. • The values of the primary keys should seldom, if ever, change. The values should also be short and easy to enter correctly. • If a suitable column doesn't exist for a p1imary key, you can create an ID column that is incremented by one for each new row as the primary key. • If two tables have a one-to-many relationship, you may need to add a foreign key column to the table on the ''many'' side. The foreign key column must have the same data type as the primary key colum11 it's related to. • If two tables have a many-to-many relationship, you'll need to define a linking table to relate them. Then, each of the tables in the many-to-many relationship will have a one-to-many relationship with the linking table. The linking table doesn't usually have a primary key. • If two tables have

of the tables in the many-to-many relationship will have a one-to-many relationship with the linking table. The linking table doesn't usually have a primary key. • If two tables have a one-to-one relationship, they should be related by their primary keys. This type of relationship is typically used to improve performance. Then, columns with large amounts of data can be stored in a separate table. Figure 10-5 How to identify the primary and foreign keys

316 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, The third example in figure 10-5 illustrates two tables that have a one-to-one relationship. With this type of relationship, both tables have the same primary key, which 1neans that the information could be stored in a single table. This type of relationship is often used when a table contains one or more columns with large amounts of data. In this case, the Employee_Photos table contains a large binary column with a photo of each employee. Because this column is used infrequently, storing it in a separate table will make operations on the Employees table more efficient. Then, when this column is needed, it can be combined with the columns in the Employees table using a join. How to enforce the relationships between tables Although the primary keys and foreign keys indicate how the tables in a database are related, the database management system doesn't always enforce those relationships automatically. In that case, any of the operations shown in the table at the top of figure 10-6 would violate the referential integrity of the

doesn't always enforce those relationships automatically. In that case, any of the operations shown in the table at the top of figure 10-6 would violate the referential integrity of the tables. If you deleted a row from a primary key table, for example, and the foreign key table included rows related to that primary key, the referential integrity of the two tables would be destroyed. In that case, the rows in the foreign key table that no longer have a related row in the primary key table would be orphaned. Similar problems can occur when you insert a row into the foreign key table or update a pri1nary key or foreign key value. To enforce those relationships and maintain the referential integrity of the tables, MySQL provides for declarative referential integrity. To use it, you define foreign key constraints that indicate how the referential integrity between the tables is enforced. You'll learn more about defining foreign key constraints i11 the next chapter. For now, just realize that these constraints can prevent all of the operations listed in this figure that

You'll learn more about defining foreign key constraints i11 the next chapter. For now, just realize that these constraints can prevent all of the operations listed in this figure that violate referential integrity.

Chapter 10 Hovv to design a database 317 Operations that can violate referential integrity This operation... Violates referential integrity if ... Delete a row from the primary key table The foreign key table contains one or more rows related to the deleted row Insert a row in the foreign key table The foreign key value doesn't have a matching primary key value in the related table Update the value of a foreign key The new foreign key value doesn't have a matching primary key value in the related table Update the value of a primary key The foreign key table contains one or more rows related to the row that's changed Description • Referential integrity means that the relationships between tables are maintained correctly. That means that a table with a foreign key doesn't have rows with foreign key values that don't have matching primary key values in the related table. • In MySQL, you can enforce referential integrity by using declarative referential integrity. • To use declarative t·eferential integrity (DRI), you define foreign key constraints. You'll learn how to

table. • In MySQL, you can enforce referential integrity by using declarative referential integrity. • To use declarative t·eferential integrity (DRI), you define foreign key constraints. You'll learn how to do that in the next chapter. • When you define foreign key constraints, you can specify how referential integrity is enforced when a row is deleted from the primary key table. The options are to return an error, to delete the related rows in the foreign key table, or to set the foreign key values in the related rows to null. • If referential integrity isn't enforced and a row is deleted from the primary key table that has related rows in the foreign key table, the rows in the foreign key table are said to be orphaned. Figure 10-6 How to enforce the relationships between tables

## Examples

318 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How normalization works The next step in the design process is to review whether the data structure is normalized. To do that, you look at how the data is separated into related tables. If you follow the first four steps for designing a database that are presented in this chapter, your database will already be partially normalized when you get to this step. However, almost every design can be normalized further. Figure 10-7 illustrates how normalization works. The first two tables in this figure show some of the problems caused by an unnormalized data structure. In the first table, you can see that each row represents an invoice. Because an invoice can have one or more line items, however, the item_description column must be repeated to provide for the maximum number of line items. But since most invoices have fewer line items than the maximum, this can waste storage space. In the second table, each line item is stored in a separate row. That elimi- nates the problem caused by repeating the item_description

the maximum, this can waste storage space. In the second table, each line item is stored in a separate row. That elimi- nates the problem caused by repeating the item_description column, but it introduces a new problem: the vendor name and invoice number must be repeated in each row. This, too, can cause storage problems, particularly if a repeated column is large. In addition, it can cause maintenance problems if a column contains a value that's likely to change. Then, when the value changes, each row that contains the value must be updated. And if a repeated value n1ust be reentered for each new row, it would be easy for the value to vary from one row to another. To eliminate the problems cat1sed by data redundancy, you can normalize the data structure. To do that, you apply the normal forms you '11 learn about later in this chapter. As you'll see, there are a total of seven normal forms. Howeve1·, it's common to apply only the frrst three. The diagram in this figure, for example, shows the accounts payable

you'll see, there are a total of seven normal forms. Howeve1·, it's common to apply only the frrst three. The diagram in this figure, for example, shows the accounts payable system in third normal form. Although it may not be obvious at this point how this reduces data redundancy, that will become clearer as you learn about the different normal forms.

Chapter 10 Hovv to design a database 319 A table that contains repeating columns vendor _name lnvoice_number it:em_desaipbon_ 1 item_desoiptlon_2 item_desaiption_3 - ► Cahners Publishing 112897 Android ad MySQLad Library directory Zylka Design 97/552 Catalogs MySQL flyer UWII Zylka Design 97/ SSE Card revision HL'!l!I Htm!I A table that contains redundant data vendor name lnv01ce number item_descrtption ► Cahners Publishing 112897 Android ad Cahners Publishing 112897 MySQLad Cahners Publishing 112897 Library directory Zylka Design 97/522 Catalogs Zylka Design 97/522 MySQL flyer Zylka Design 97/53E Card revision -- .,,,. ~ ~ The accounts payable system in third normal form vendors vendor id - vendor name - vendor address vendor_ city vendor state - vendor_zip _code vendor_phone vendor contact first name - - - vendor contact last name - - - default terms id - - default account no - - Description ' • • 1nvo1ces invoice id - vendor id - invoice number - invoice date - invoice total - payment_ tota I credit total - terms id - invoice due date - - payment_date terms terms id - terms_ description

invoice number - invoice date - invoice total - payment_ tota I credit total - terms id - invoice due date - - payment_date terms terms id - terms_ description terms_due_days invoices line items - - ••----◄ invoice _id . . 1nvo1ce_sequence account no line item amount - - line_item_ description general_ledger_accounts account no - account_ description • Normalization is a formal process you can use to separate the data in a data struc- ture into related tables. Normalization reduces data redundancy, which can cause storage and maintenance problems. • In an unnormalized data structure, a table can contain information about two or more entities. It can also contain repeating columns, columns that contain repeating values, and data that's repeated in two or more rows. • In a normalized data structure, each table contains information about a single entity, and each piece of inforrnation is stored in exactly one place. • To normalize a data structure, you apply the normal forms in sequence. Although there are a total of seven normal forms, a data structure is typically considered normalized if

• To normalize a data structure, you apply the normal forms in sequence. Although there are a total of seven normal forms, a data structure is typically considered normalized if the first three nor1nal forms are applied. Figure 10-7 How normalization works .

## Related Concepts

- [database-design](./database-design.md)

---

**Tags:** `database` `normalization`
