# Outer Joins

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 30 minutes

## Overview

Retrieving all rows from one table and matching rows from another (LEFT, RIGHT, FULL)

📖 *Source: Page 148, Page 149, Page 150, Page 151, Page 152, Page 153, Page 154, Page 155*

## Definition

128 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL How to work with outer joins Although inner joins are the most common type of join, MySQL also supports outer joins. Unlike an inner join, an outer join returns all of the rows from one of the tables involved in the join, regardless of whether the join condi- tion is true. How to code an outer join Figure 4-8 presents the explicit syntax for coding an outer join. Because this sy.ntax is similar to the explicit syntax for inner joins, you shouldn't have any trouble understanding how it works. The main difference is that you include the LEFT or RIGHT keyword to specify the type of outer join you want to perform. You can also include the OUTER keyword, but it's optional and is usually omitted. When you use a left outer join, the result set includes all the rows from the first, or left, table. Similarly, when you use a right outer join, the result set includes all the rows from the second, or right, table. The example in this figure illustrates

or left, table. Similarly, when you use a right outer join, the result set includes all the rows from the second, or right, table. The example in this figure illustrates a left outer join. Here, the Vendors table is joined with the Invoices table. In addition, the result set includes vendor rows even if no matching invoices are found. In that case, null values are returned for the columns in the Invoices table.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data f rom two or m.ore tables 129 The explicit syntax for an outer join SELECT select_ list FROM table_ l {LEFTIRIGHT} [OUTER] JOIN table_ 2 ON join_condition_ l [{LEFTIRIGHT} [OUTER] JOIN table_ 3 ON join_condition_ 2] ... What outer joins do Joins of this type Retrieve unmatched rows from Left outer join Right outer join A left outer join The first (left) table The second (right) table SELECT vendor_ name, invoice_number, invoice_total FROM vendors LEFT JOIN invoices ON vendors.vendor_ id = invoices.vendor_id ORDER BY vendor_name _J vendor _name ► Abbey Office Furnishings American Booksellers Assoc American Express - ASCSigns I Ase.om Hasler Mailing Systems (202 rows) Description invoice_number nvoice_total 203339-13 17.50 l)QJ!t '®'' HWSI UPJII OPill Ul9!1 l:tt!I • An outer join 1·etrieves all rows that satisfy the join condition, plus unmatched rows in the left or right table. • In most cases, you use the equal operator to retrieve rows with matching columns. However, you can also use any of the other comparison operators. • When a row with unmatched columns is retrieved,

use the equal operator to retrieve rows with matching columns. However, you can also use any of the other comparison operators. • When a row with unmatched columns is retrieved, any columns from the other table that are included in the result set are given null values. Note • The OUTER keyword is optional and typically omitted. Figure 4-8 How to code an outer join

## Syntax

130 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL Outer join examples To give yot1 a better understanding of how outer joins work, figure 4-9 shows four more examples. To start, part 1 of this figure shows the Departments table, the Employees table, and the Projects table from the EX database. These tables are used by the examples shown in parts 2 and 3 of this figure. In addition, they're used in other examples later in this chapter. The first example performs a left outer join on the Departments and Employees tables. Here, the join condition joins the tables based on the values in their department_number columns. Then, the result set produced by this state- ment, shows that department number 3 (Operations) is included in the result set even though none of the employees in the Employees table work in that depart- ment. As a result, MySQL assigns a null value to the last_name column from that table. The second example uses a right outer join to join the Departments and Employees table. In this case, all of the rows from the

the last_name column from that table. The second example uses a right outer join to join the Departments and Employees table. In this case, all of the rows from the Employees table are included in the result set. However, two of the employees, Locario and Watson, are assigned to a department that doesn't exist in the Departments table. If the department_number column in the Employees table had been defined as a foreign key to the Departments table, this would not have been allowed by MySQL. In this case, though, a foreign key wasn't defi11ed, so null values are returned for the department_name column in these two rows. When coding outer joins, it's a common practice to avoid using right joins. To do that, yot1 can substitute a left outer join for a right outer join by reversing the order of the tables in the FROM clause and using the LEFT keyword instead of RIGHT. This often makes it easier to read statements that join more than two tables. The tlru:d example shows that you can use outer joins to work

keyword instead of RIGHT. This often makes it easier to read statements that join more than two tables. The tlru:d example shows that you can use outer joins to work with more than two tables. To do that, you use skills similar to those that you use to work with inner joins with more than two tables. In this example, the statement uses left outer joins to join all three tables: Departments, Employees, and Projects. Because of this, the result set uses a null value to show that none of the employees are assigned to the Operations department. In addition, the result set uses null values to show that two employees, Hardy and Jones, aren't assigned to a project. The fourth example shows that you can combine inner joins and outer joins in the same query. Here, the query works like the third example, but it uses an inner join for the frrst join instead of a left outer join. Because of this, the result set doesn't include a row for the Operations department. However, it still displays the rows

for the frrst join instead of a left outer join. Because of this, the result set doesn't include a row for the Operations department. However, it still displays the rows for the two employees, Hardy and Jones, that aren't assigned to a project.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data from two or m.ore tables 131 The Departments table department_number department_name - ► 1 Accounting 2 PayroU 3 Operations 4 Personnel 5 Maintenance The Employees table I employeejd last_name first_name department_number manager,Jd ► 1 Smith Cindy 2 U®Mi 2 Jones Elmer 4 1 3 Simonian Ralph 2 2 4 Hernandez Olivia 1 9 5 Aaronsen Robert 2 4 6 Watson Denise 6 8 7 Hardy Thomas 5 2 8 O'Leary Rhea 4 9 9 Locario Paulo 6 1 The Projects table _j project_number employee_id ► PlOll 8 PlOll 4 P1012 3 P1012 1 P1012 s P1013 6 P1013 9 P1014 10 Description • The examples in this figure use the Departments, Employees, and Projects tables from the EX database. Figure 4-9 Outer join examples (part 1 of 3) 17

## Examples

132 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL A left outer join SELECT department_ name, d.department_number, last_name FROM departments d LEFT JOIN employees e ON d.department_number = e.department_number ORDER BY department_name department_name department_number last_name ► Accounting 1 Hernandez Maintenance s Hardy Operations 3 Hlf191 PayroO 2 Smith PayroU 2 Simonian PayroO 2 Aaronsen Personnel 4 Jones Personnel 4 O'Leary (8 rows) A right outer join SELECT department_ name, e.department_number, last_name FROM departments d RIGHT JOIN employees e ON d.department_number = e.department_number ORDER BY department_name deparbnent_name deparbnent_number last name - - ► 6 Watson 6 Locario Accounting 1 Hernandez Mahtenance s Hardy PayroD 2 Smith PayroO 2 Simonian Payroll 2 Aaronsen Personnel 4 Jones Personnel 4 O'leary (9 rows) Description • A left outer join returns unmatched rows from the first (left) table. • A right outer join returns unmatched rows from the second (right) table. Figure 4-9 Outer join examples (part 2 of 3)

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data from two or m.ore tables Join three tables using left outer joins SELECT department_ name, last_name, project_nwnber FROM departments d LEFT JOIN employees e ON d.department_nwnber = e.department_ nwnber LEFT JOIN projects p ON e.employee_ id = p.employee_ id ORDER BY department_name, last_name __l department_name last name project_number - ► Accounting Hernandez PlOll Maintenance Hardy IU991 Operations D©91 11®11 PayroD Aaronsen PlOU PayroU Simonian PlOU Payroll Smith PlOU Personnel Jones OWII Personnel O'Leary P1011 (8 rows ) Combine an outer and an inner join SELECT department_name, last_name, project_nwnber FROM departments d JOIN employees e ON d. department_nwnber = e. department_ n11mber LEFT JOIN projects p ON e.employee_ id = p.employee_ id ORDER BY department_name, last_name ~ ~ department_name last name project_number - Accounting Hernandez P10 11 Maintenance Hardy IU991 PayroD Aaronsen PlOU Payroll Simonian PlOU Payroll Smith PlOU Personnel Jones 0®91 Personnel O'Leary PlOll ( 7 rows) Description • You can use outer joins to join multiple tables. • You can combine inner and outer joins within a single SELECT statement. Figure 4-9 Outer

( 7 rows) Description • You can use outer joins to join multiple tables. • You can combine inner and outer joins within a single SELECT statement. Figure 4-9 Outer join examples (part 3 of 3) 133

## Common Mistakes

134 Section 1 An introduction to MySQL Other skills for working with joins Now that you know how to work with inner and outer joins, you 're ready to learn how to join tables with the USING and NATURAL keywords. In addition, you're ready to learn about another type of join, called a cross join. How to join tables with the USING keyword When you use the equal operator to join two tables on a common column, the join can be referred to as an equijoin (or an eqiti-join). When you code an equijoin, it's common for the columns that are being compared to have the same name. For joins like these, you can simplify the query with the USING keyword. To do that, you code a USING clause instead of an ON clause to specify the join as shown in figure 4-10. The first example in this figure shows how to join the Vendors and Invoices tables on the vendor id column with a USING clause. This returns the same results as the query shown in figure 4-1 that

how to join the Vendors and Invoices tables on the vendor id column with a USING clause. This returns the same results as the query shown in figure 4-1 that uses the ON clause. However, the USING clause only works because the vendor_id column exists in both the Vendors and Invoices tables. The second example shows how to join the Departments, Employees, and Projects tables with the USING keyword. Here, the first USING clause uses an inner join to join the Departments table to the Employees table on the depart- ment_number column. Then, the second USING clause uses a left join to join the Employees table to the Projects table on the employee_id column. This shows that you can use a USING clause for both inner and outer joins, and this query returns the same result as the last query shown in figure 4-9. In some rare cases, you may want to join tables by multiple columns. To do that with a USING clause, you can code multiple column names within the parentheses, separating the column names with commas. This

want to join tables by multiple columns. To do that with a USING clause, you can code multiple column names within the parentheses, separating the column names with commas. This yields the same result as coding two equijoins connected with the AND operator. Since the USING clause is more concise than the ON clause, it can make your code easier to read and maintain. As a result, it often makes sense to use the USING clause when you're developing new statements. However, if you can't get the USING clause to work correctly because of the way your database is structured, you can always use the ON clause instead.

Chapter 4 How to retrieve data from two or m.ore tables 135 The syntax for a join that uses the USING keyword SELECT select_list FROM table_ l [{LEFT IRIGHT} [OUTER]] JOIN table_ 2 USING (join_colwnn_ l[, join_colwnn_ 2] ••• ) [[{LEFT IRIGHT} [OUTER]] JOIN table_ 3 USING (join_ colwnn_ l[, join_colwnn_ 2] ••• )] • •• Use the USING keyword to join two tables SELECT invoice_number, vendor_name FROM vendors JOIN invoices USING (vendor_ id) ORDER BY invoice_number invoice_number vendor name - - - ► 0-2058 Malloy Lithographing Inc 0-2060 Malloy Lithographing Inc 0-2436 Malloy Lithographing Inc 1-200-5164 Federal Express Corporation 1-202-2978 Federal Express Corporation 10843 Yesmed, Inc (114 rows) Use the USING keyword to join three tables SELECT department_name, last_name, project_number FROM departments JOIN employees USING (department_ number) LEFT JOIN projects USING (employee_id) ORDER BY department_name f department_name last name project_number - - ► Accounting Hernandez P1011 Maintenance Hardy 00991 PayroD Simonian PlOU Payroll Smi1h PlOU Payroll Aaronsen PlOU Personnel O'Leary P1011 Personnel Jones t:[991 (7 rows) Description • You can use the USING keyword to simplify the syntax for

PayroD Simonian PlOU Payroll Smi1h PlOU Payroll Aaronsen PlOU Personnel O'Leary P1011 Personnel Jones t:[991 (7 rows) Description • You can use the USING keyword to simplify the syntax for joining tables. • The join can be an inner join or an outer join. • The tables must be joined by a column that bas the same name in both tables. • To include multiple colu1nns, separate them with commas. • The join must be an equijoin, which means that the equals operator is used to compare the two columns. Figure 4-1 0 How to join tables with the USING keyword L I I

## Related Concepts

- [joins-intro](./joins-intro.md)
- [inner-join](./inner-join.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `joins` `outer-join` `left-join`
