# Stored Procedures and Functions

🔴 **Difficulty:** Advanced
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 50 minutes

## Overview

Creating reusable SQL code blocks stored in the database

📖 *Source: Page 460, Page 461, Page 462, Page 463, Page 464, Page 465, Page 466, Page 467, Page 468, Page 469, Page 470, Page 471, Page 472, Page 473*

## Definition

440 Section 4 Stored prvgram development How to lock selected rows In some cases, the default isolation level of REPEATABLE READ doesn't work the way you want. For example, suppose you want to code a transaction that selects data and then inserts or updates data in related tables. In that case, because a SELECT statement doesn't lock the data it retrieves by default, another transaction could update or delete the rows read by the first transaction before that transaction is done modifying the related tables. To solve this type of problem, MySQL provides two ways to lock the rows returned by a SELECT statement. First, you can add a FOR SHARE clause (LOCK IN SHARE MODE with MySQL 5.7 and earlier) to the end of a SELECT statement. This locks the selected rows so other transactions can read them but can't modify them until your transaction commjts. Second, you can add a FOR UPDATE clause to the end of a SELECT statement. This locks the selected rows and any associated indexes just like an UPDATE statement does. Then, other transactions

add a FOR UPDATE clause to the end of a SELECT statement. This locks the selected rows and any associated indexes just like an UPDATE statement does. Then, other transactions can't read or modify these rows until your transaction commits. When you use the FOR SHARE clause, the SELECT statement waits if it encounters rows that have been locked for update by another statement such as an UPDATE, DELETE, or SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement. That way, it can read the most current data. However, the FOR SHARE clause doesn't wait for rows that have been locked for share. On the other hand, the FOR UPDATE clause wruts for rows that have been locked for share or for update. Because of this, the FOR SHARE clause provides better perforrnance than the FOR UPDATE clause. As a result, you should use the FOR SHARE clause if you don't need to prevent other transactions from reading the same rows. With MySQL 8.0 and later, you can also keep your transactions from waiting for locks to be released. To do that, you can

other transactions from reading the same rows. With MySQL 8.0 and later, you can also keep your transactions from waiting for locks to be released. To do that, you can add the NO WAIT or SKIP LOCKED option to the end of a FOR SHARE or FOR UPDATE clause. The NO WAIT option causes the statement to immediately retur·n an error that the developer can handle. The SKIP LOCKED option skips any rows that have been locked and returns the rest. Figure 14-6 p1·esents a se1ies of transactions that show how the FOR SHARE and FOR UPDATE clauses of a SELECT statement work. To start, transaction A executes a SELECT statement that uses the FOR SHARE clause to lock the row in the Sales_Reps table that has a rep_id value of 2. At this point, no other transactions can modify this row until transaction A completes. This makes sure that transaction A can modify the data in a child table before any other transaction can update or delete the corresponding row in the parent table. In transaction B, the SELECT

transaction A can modify the data in a child table before any other transaction can update or delete the corresponding row in the parent table. In transaction B, the SELECT statement includes the FOR UPDATE clause. As a result, it attempts to lock 4 rows for update. If transaction A still has a lock on one of these rows, though, transaction B waits for that lock to be released. Once transaction A completes, the SELECT statement in transaction B is executed. This returns four rows with rep_id values of 1, 2, 3, and 4.

Chapter 14 How to use transactions and locking 441 Four transactions that show how to work with locking reads Transaction A -- Execute each statement one at a time. - - Al tern.ate with Transactions B, C, and D as described. START TRANSACTION; -- lock row with rep_ id of 2 in parent table ---- SELECT* FROM sales_ reps WHERE rep_ id = 2 FOR SHARE; Transaction B waits for transaction A to finish Transaction C returns an error immediately -- Transaction D skips the locked row and returns the other rows imm.ediately -- insert row with rep_ id of 2 into child table INSERT INTO sales_ totals (rep_ id, sales_year, sales_ total) VALUES (2, 2019, 138193.69); COMMIT; -- Transaction B executes now Transaction B - use a second connection for these statements! START TRANSACTION; SELECT * FROM sales_reps WHERE rep_id < 5 FOR UPDATE'; COMMIT; Transaction C - use a second connection for these statements! START TRANSACTION; SELECT* FROM sales_ reps WHERE rep_ id < 5 FOR UPDATE NOWAI ; COMMIT; Transaction D - use a second connection for

a second connection for these statements! START TRANSACTION; SELECT* FROM sales_ reps WHERE rep_ id < 5 FOR UPDATE NOWAI ; COMMIT; Transaction D - use a second connection for these statements! START TRANSACTION; SELECT* FROM sales_reps WHERE rep_ id < 5 ~ OR UPDATE SKIP LOCKED; COMMIT; Description • If you add the FOR SHARE clause to the end of a SELECT statement, the selected rows are locked so other transactions can read those rows but can't modify them until the transaction commits. • If you add the FOR UPDATE clause to the end of a SELECT statement, the selected rows and any associated indexes are locked so other transactions can't read or modify them until the transaction commits. This works the same as the locks for an UPDATE statement. • If a SELECT ... FOR SHARE statement attempts to read any rows that have been locked for update by another transaction, it waits until that transaction commits so it can use the most current values. • If a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement attempts to read any rows

by another transaction, it waits until that transaction commits so it can use the most current values. • If a SELECT ... FOR UPDATE statement attempts to read any rows that have been locked for share or for update by another transaction, it waits until that transaction commits so it can use the most current values. • When the NOWAIT option is included on a FOR SHARE or FOR UPDATE clause, the statement doesn't wait for a lock to be released. Instead, it returns an error immediately. This allows a developer to handle the error instead of waiting for the lock to release. • When the SKIP LOCKED option is included on a FOR SHARE or FOR UPDATE clause, the statement doesn't wait for a lock to be released. Instead, it skips the locked rows and returns any rows that are not locked. Figure 14-6 How to lock selected rows

442 Section 4 Stored prvgram development Transaction C works like transaction B, except that it includes the NO WAIT option. As a result, if transaction A still has a lock on any rows selected by trans- action C, running its SELECT statement causes an error to occur immediately. This allows a developer to handle the error instead of having to wait for the lock to be released. Transaction D also works like transaction B, except that it includes the SKIP LOCKED option. As a result, if transaction A still has a lock on any rows selected by transaction D, its SELECT statement executes but skips any locked rows. In this example, it skips the row with a rep_id value of 2 and returns three rows that have rep_id values of 1, 3, and 4. How to prevent deadlocks A deadlock occurs when neither of two transactions can be com1nitted because each has a lock on a resource needed by the other transaction. This is illustrated by the banking transactions in figure 14-7. Here, transaction A updates the savings account first

each has a lock on a resource needed by the other transaction. This is illustrated by the banking transactions in figure 14-7. Here, transaction A updates the savings account first and then the checking account, while transac- tion B updates the checkiI1g account first and then the savings account. Now, suppose that the first statement in transaction A locks the savings account, and the first statement in transaction Blocks the checking account. At that point, a deadlock occurs because transaction A needs the savings account and transaction B needs the checking account, but both are locked. Eventually, one of the transactions has to be rolled back so the other can proceed, and the loser is known as a deadlock victim. To prevent deadlocks, you can use the four techniques that are presented in this figure. First, you shouldn't leave transactions open any longer than is neces- sary. That's because the longer a transaction remains open and uncommitted, the more likely it is that another transaction will need to work with that same resource. So, when you're coding transactions, make sure

longer a transaction remains open and uncommitted, the more likely it is that another transaction will need to work with that same resource. So, when you're coding transactions, make sure to include the appropriate COMMIT and ROLLBACK statements. In addition, don't code statements that take a long time to execute between the START TRANSACTION statement that starts the transaction and the COMMIT or ROLLBACK statement that finishes the transaction. Second, you shouldn't use a higher isolation level than you need. That's becat1se the higher you set the isolation level, the more likely it is that two transactions will be unable to work with the same resource at the same time. Third, you should schedule transactions that modify a large number of rows to 1·un when no other transactions, or only a small number of other transactions, will be running. That way, it's less likely that the transactions will try to change the same rows at the same time. Finally, you should consider how the SQL statements you write could cause a deadlock. To prevent the situation that's illustrated in this

change the same rows at the same time. Finally, you should consider how the SQL statements you write could cause a deadlock. To prevent the situation that's illustrated in this figure, for example, you should always update related accounts in the same sequence.

Chapter 14 How to use transactions and locking 443 Don't allow transactions to remain open for very long • Keep transactions short. • Keep SELECT statements outside of the transaction except when absolutely necessary. • Never code requests for user input during a transaction. Don't use a transaction isolation level higher than necessary • The default level of REPEATABLE READ is usually acceptable, but you should consider changing to READ COMMITTED if deadlocks becon1e a problem. • Reserve the use of the SERIALIZABLE level for short transactions that make changes to data where integrity is vital. Make large changes when you can be assured of nearly exclusive access • If you need to change millions of rows in an active table, don't do so during hours of peak usage. • If possible, give yourself exclusive access to the database before making large changes. Take locking behavior into consideration when coding your transactions • If you need to code two or more transactions that update the same resources, code the updates in the same order in each transaction. UPDATE statements that

your transactions • If you need to code two or more transactions that update the same resources, code the updates in the same order in each transaction. UPDATE statements that illustrate deadlocking Transaction A START TRANSACTION; UPDATE savings SET balance= balance - transfer_amount; UPDATE checking SET balance= balance + transfer_amount ; COMMIT; Transaction B (possible deadlock) START TRANSACTION; UPDATE checking SET balance = balance - t r ansf er_ amount ; UPDATE savings SET balance= balance+ transfer_ amount; COMMIT; Transaction B (prevents deadlocks) START TRANSACTION; UPDATE savings SET balance = balance+ transfer_ amount; UPDATE checking SET balance = balance - t ransfer_ amount ; COMMI T; Description • A deadlock occurs when neither of two transactions can be committed because each transaction has a lock on a resource needed by the other transaction. Figure 14-7 How to prevent deadlocks

## Syntax

444 Section 4 Stored prvgram development Perspective In this chapter, you learned the ways that MySQL protects your data from the problems that can occur on a real-world system. Since the failure of one or more related SQL statements can violate data integrity, you learned how to prevent these problems by grouping the statements into transactions. SiI1ce multiple transactions can simultaneously modify the same data, you learned how to prevent concurrency problems by setting the transaction isolation level to change the default locking behavior. And since changing the isolation level can increase the chances of deadlocks, you learned defensive programming techniques to prevent deadlocks. Terms transaction commit a transaction roll back a transaction save point concurrency locking lost update Exercises dirty read nonrepeatable read phantom read transaction isolation level deadlock deadlock victim 1. Write a script that creates and calls a stored procedure named test. This procedure should include a set of three SQL statements coded as a transaction to reflect the following change: United Parcel Service has been purchased by Federal Express Co1-poration and the new company is named

set of three SQL statements coded as a transaction to reflect the following change: United Parcel Service has been purchased by Federal Express Co1-poration and the new company is named FedUP. Rename one of the vendors and delete the other after updating the vendor_id column in the Invoices table. If these statements execute successfully, commit the changes. Otherwise, roll back the changes. 2. Write a script that creates and calls a stored procedure named test. This procedure sho11ld include a set of two SQL statements coded as a transaction to delete the row with an invoice ID of 114 from the Invoices table. To do this, you must first delete all line items for that invoice from the Invoice Line Items table. - - If these statements execute successfully, commit the changes. Otherwise, roll back the changes.

How to create stored procedures and functions In chapter 13, you learned how to create a stored procedure that didn't accept any parameters. Now, you'll learn how to create stored procedures that accept parameters. In addition, you'll learn how to code stored functions. As you'll see, stored procedures allow you to store procedural logic such as data validation in a central location. In addition, they provide a powerful way to control how users are allowed to access the database. How to code stored procedures ....................................... 446 How to create and call a stored procedure ................................................. 446 How to code input and output parameters .................................................. 448 How to set a default value for a para1neter .................................................. 450 How to validate parameters and raise errors ............................................... 452 A stored procedure that inserts a row .......................................................... 454 How to work with user variables ................................................................. 458 How to work with dynamic SQL ................................................................ 460 How to drop a stored procedure .................................................................. 462 How to code stored functions ........................................... 464 How to create and call a function ............................................................... 464 How to use function characteristics ............................................................

How to drop a stored procedure .................................................................. 462 How to code stored functions ........................................... 464 How to create and call a function ............................................................... 464 How to use function characteristics ............................................................ 466 A function that calculates balance due ....................................................... 468 How to drop a function ................................................................................ 470 How to use Workbench with procedures and functions ...................................................................... 472 How to view and edit stored routines .......................................................... 472 How to create stored routines ...................................................................... 472 How to drop stored routines ........................................................................ 472 Perspective ......................................................................... 474

446 Section 4 Stored prvgram development How to code stored procedures A stored procedure, which can also be referred to as a sproc or just a proce- dure, is a database object that contains procedural SQL code. You can use stored procedures to modify the data that's stored within a database. For example, you can use a stored procedure to execute an INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statement. How to create and call a stored procedure Figure 15-1 shows how to use the CREATE PROCEDURE statement to create a stored procedure. To start, you code the CREATE PROCEDURE keywords followed by the name of the procedure. In this figure, for example, the statement creates a procedure named update_invoices_credit_total. This name clearly indicates that the procedure updates the credit_total column of the invoices table. After the name of the procedure, you code a set of parentheses. Within the parentheses, you can code one or more pa,·ameters for the procedure. A parameter is typically used to pass a value to the stored procedure from a calling program. If a procedure accepts more than

one or more pa,·ameters for the procedure. A parameter is typically used to pass a value to the stored procedure from a calling program. If a procedure accepts more than one parameter, you must use commas to separate the parameters. When you declare a parameter, you code the name of the parameter followed by its data type. In this figure, for example, the proce- dure accepts two parameters. The first parameter is named invoice_id_param with a data type of INT, and the second parameter is named credit_total_param with a data type of DECIMAL. After the parentheses, you code a block of statements. This block is identi- fied by the BEGIN and END keywords. Within the block, you can code most SQL statements including the ones for writing procedural code presented in chapter 13 and the ones for working with transactions presented in chapter 14. When you run the CREATE PROCEDURE statement, MySQL compiles the code for the procedure and stores the compiled code in the database. As part of this process, MySQL's compiler checks the syntax of the code within

statement, MySQL compiles the code for the procedure and stores the compiled code in the database. As part of this process, MySQL's compiler checks the syntax of the code within the proce- dure. If you've made a coding e1Tor, the system 1·esponds with an appropriate message and the procedure isn't created. You can execute, or call, a stored procedure by using the CALL statement. In this figure, for example, the CALL statement calls the procedure that was created in the first example. This statement passes one value for each of the parameters that are defined by the procedure. Here, the first parameter is a literal value that specifies the invoice ID, and the second parameter is a literal value that identifies the new amount for the credit total. When you use the CALL statement, you must pass parameters by position. In other words, you must code the parameters in the same order as they are coded in the CREATE PROCEDURE statement. In chapter 18, you will learn how to grant INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE privileges to specific users. However, if

same order as they are coded in the CREATE PROCEDURE statement. In chapter 18, you will learn how to grant INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE privileges to specific users. However, if you want to have more fine-grained control over the privileges that you grant to users, you can create stored proce-

Chapter 15 How to create stored prvcedures and functions 447 The syntax of the CREATE PROCEDURE statement CREATE PROCEDURE procedure_ name ( [parameter_name_ l data_type] [, parameter_name_ 2 data_type] ... ) sql_block A script that creates a stored procedure that updates a table DELIMITER / / CREATE PROCEDURE update_ invoices_credit_total ( invoice_ id_param credit_total_param ) BEGIN INT, DECIMAL(9,2) DECLARE sql_ error TINYINT DEFAULT FALSE; DECLARE CONTINUE HANDLER FOR SQLEXCEPTION SET sql_error = TRUE; START TRANSACTION; UPDATE invoices SET credit_total = credit_total_param WHERE invoice id= invoice_ id_param; IF sql_error = FALSE THEN COMMIT; ELSE ROLLBACK; END IF; END// A statement that calls the stored procedure CALL update_ invoic es_credit_total (56, 300 ) ; Description • You use the CREATE PROCEDURE statement to create a stored procedure. A stored procedure is an executable database object that contains procedural SQL code. A stored procedure can also be called a sp,vc or a procedure. • You can use parameters to pass one or more values from the calling program to the stored procedure or fron1 the procedure to the calling program. For more infor1na-

• You can use parameters to pass one or more values from the calling program to the stored procedure or fron1 the procedure to the calling program. For more infor1na- tion on working with parameters, see figures 15-2 and 15-3. • To declare a parameter within a stored procedure, you code the name of the param- eter followed by its data type. If you declare two or more parameters, you separate the parameters with commas. • You can use the CALL statement to call a procedure. When a procedure accepts parameters, you pass them to the procedure by coding them within the parentheses that follow the procedure name, and by separating the parameters with commas. Figure 15-1 How to create and call a stored procedure

## Examples

448 Section 4 Stored prvgram development <lures that perform all of the types of data manipulation that you want to allow within your database. Then, you can grant privileges to execute these stored procedures. For systems where security is critical, this can be an excellent way to prevent both accidental errors and malicious damage to your data. How to code input and output parameters Figure 15-2 shows how to code input and output parameters for a stored procedure. An input parameter is passed to the stored procedure from the calling program. You can explicitly identify an input parameter by coding the IN keyword before the name of the parameter. In this figure, for example, the fust two parameters are identified as input parameters. However, if you omit this keyword, the parameter is assumed to be an input parameter. In figure 15-1, for example, both parameters are input parameters. Within a procedure, you can use input parameters like variables. However, you can't change the value of the parameter. In this figure, for example, the procedure uses the fust parameter within an

procedure, you can use input parameters like variables. However, you can't change the value of the parameter. In this figure, for example, the procedure uses the fust parameter within an UPDATE statement to specify the invoice ID for the invoice row to be updated. An output parameter is returned to the calling program from the stored procedure. To code an output parameter, you must explicitly identify the param- eter by coding the OUT keyword before the name of the parameter. In this figure, for example, the third paran1eter is an output parameter. If the UPDATE statement executes successfully, a SET statement stores a value of 1 in the output parameter. Otherwise, a SET statement stores a value of O in the output parameter. Either way, the value of the output parameter is retw11ed to the calling program when the procedure finishes. To show how a calling program works, this figure includes a script that calls the procedure. Here, initial values are supplied for the two input parameters. Then, a variable named @row_count is supplied for the output parameter. This variable

includes a script that calls the procedure. Here, initial values are supplied for the two input parameters. Then, a variable named @row_count is supplied for the output parameter. This variable is a special type of variable known as a user variable. A user va1iable is a global variable that's available to the user for the rest of the current session. You'll learn more about t1ser variables later in this chapter. After the procedure executes, the value of the ot1tput parameter is stored in the @row _count variable. Then, the calling program can access this variable. In this figure, for example, the script uses a SELECT statement to display the value of the variable. However, it could also use an IF statement to check the value of the variable and perform an appropriate action. In addition to input and output parameters, MySQL provides for a parameter that can be used for both input and output. An input/output parameter stores an initial value that's passed in from the calling program like an input parameter. However, the procedure can change this value and

both input and output. An input/output parameter stores an initial value that's passed in from the calling program like an input parameter. However, the procedure can change this value and retu111 it to a calling program like an output parameter. To identify an input/output parameter, you must code the INOUT .keyword before the name of the parameter. Although this can be useft1l in some situations, it can also be confusing. As a result, it often makes sense to avoid the use of inpt1t/output parameters.

Chapter 15 How to create stored prvcedures and functions 449 The syntax for declaring input and output parameters [INIOUTIINOUT] parameter_ name data_ type A stored procedure that uses input and output parameters DELIMITER// CREATE PROCEDURE update_ invoices_credit_ total ( IN invoice_ id_param IN credit_ total_param OUT update_ count ) BEGIN INT, DECIMAL(9,2}, INT DECLARE sql_ error TINYINT DEFAULT FALSE; DECLARE CONTINUE HANDLER FOR SQLEXCEPTION SET sql_ error = TRUE; START TRANSACTION; UPDATE invoices SET credit total= credit_ total_param WHERE invoice id= invoice_ id_param; IF sql_ error = FALSE THEN SET update_count = 1; COMMIT; ELSE SET update_ count = O; ROLLBACK; END IF; END// A script that calls the stored procedure and uses the output parameter CALL update_ invoices_credit_ tota1(56, 200, @row_ count); SELECT CONCAT('row count: ', @row_ count} AS update_ count; Description • Input parameters accept values that are passed from the calling program. These values cannot be changed by the body of the stored procedure. By default, param- eters ai·e defined as input parameters. As a result, the IN keyword is optional for identifying input parameters. • Output

by the body of the stored procedure. By default, param- eters ai·e defined as input parameters. As a result, the IN keyword is optional for identifying input parameters. • Output para,neters store values that are passed back to the calling progra1n. These values must be set by the body of the stored procedure. To identify an output parameter, yot1 must code the OUT keyword. • Input/output parameters can store an initial value that's passed from the calling program. However, the body of the stored procedure can change this parameter. To identify an input/output parameter, you must code the INOUT keyword. • When you work with output parameters or input/output parameters, the calling program typically passes a user variable to the parameter list. For more information about t1ser variables, see figure 15-6. Figure 15-2 How to code input and output parameters

450 Section 4 Stored prvgram development How to set a default value for a parameter Figure 15-3 shows how to set a default value for a parameter. This is useful if a null value is passed for the parameter. Then, the default value can be used instead of the null value. In this figure, the stored procedure sets a default value for the second param- eter, which contains the credit total to be assigned to the credit_total column for an invoice. To do that, it uses an IF statement to check if the parameter contains a null value. If it does, the value of the parameter is set to 100. The two CALL statements in this figure show two ways that you can provide values to the stored procedure. Here, the first CALL statement supplies a value for each parameter. As a result, the credit total for the invoice is set to 200. In contrast, the second CALL statement supplies a value of NULL for the second parameter. In that case, the credit total for the invoice is set to

set to 200. In contrast, the second CALL statement supplies a value of NULL for the second parameter. In that case, the credit total for the invoice is set to the default value of 100. When you set default values for one or more parameters, it usually makes sense to code these parameters at the end of the parameter list. That way, when you call the stored procedure, you can code all the non-null values first.

Chapter 15 How to create stored prvcedures and functions 451 A CREATE PROCEDURE statement that provides a default value DELIMITER// CREATE PROCEDURE update_ invoices_credit_total ( invoice_ id_param INT, credit_ total_param DECIMAL(9,2) ) BEGIN DECLARE sql_error TINYINT DEFAULT FALSE; DECLARE CONTINUE HANDLER FOR SQLEXCEPTION SET sql_error = TRUE; -- Set default values for NULL values IF credit_ total_param IS NULL THEN SET credit_ total_param = 100; END IF; START TRANSACTION; UPDATE invoices SET credit_total = credit_ total_param WHERE invoice id= invoice_ id_param; IF sql_ error = FALSE THEN COMMIT; ELSE ROLLBACK; END IF; END// A statement that calls the stored procedure CALL update_ invoices_credit_total(56, 200); Another statement that calls the stored procedure CALL update_ invoices_credit_total(56, NULL); Description • You can provide a default value for a parameter so that if the calling program passes a null value for the parameter, the default value is used instead. • To set a default value for a parameter, you can use an IF statement to check if the parameter contains a null value. If it does, you can assign a default value to the

value for a parameter, you can use an IF statement to check if the parameter contains a null value. If it does, you can assign a default value to the parameter. • It's a good programming practice to code your CREATE PROCEDURE statements so they list parameters that require values first, fallowed by parameters that allow null values. Figure 15-3 How to set a default value for a parameter

## Common Mistakes

452 Section 4 Stored prvgram development How to validate parameters and raise errors Within a stored procedure, it's generally considered a good practice to prevent errors by checking the parameters before they 're used to make sure they're valid. This is often refe1Ted to as data validation. Then, if the data isn't valid, you can execute code that makes it valid, or you can raise an error, which returns the error to the calling program. Figure 15-4 shows how to raise an error using one of the predefined en·ors that are available from MySQL. To do that, you code the SIGNAL statement followed by the SQLSTATE keyword, followed by a SQLSTATE code. Then, you can optionally include a SET statement that sets a message and MySQL error code for the error. In this figure, for example, the IF statement checks whether the value of the second parameter is less than zero. If it is, the SIGNAL statement raises an error with a SQLSTATE code of 22003, a MySQL code of 1264, and a message that indicates that the credit total

zero. If it is, the SIGNAL statement raises an error with a SQLSTATE code of 22003, a MySQL code of 1264, and a message that indicates that the credit total column must be greater than or equal to 0. These SQLSTATE and MySQL codes are commonly used to validate parameters since they are used to indicate that the value is out of range for the column. If the calling program doesn't catch this error, the system displays an error message. In this figure, for example, the CALL statement passes a negative value to the second parameter, which causes the error to be raised. As a result, the system displays an error 1nessage that contains the MySQL error code and message specified by the SIGNAL statement. Since this error code and message accurately describe the error, the programmer or user of the calling program should be able to identify and fix the problem. On the other hand, if the calling program catches this error, it can include code that handles the en·or. For example, the calling program can handle the error

the problem. On the other hand, if the calling program catches this error, it can include code that handles the en·or. For example, the calling program can handle the error by printing a user-friendly message and asking the user to input data again.

Chapter 15 How to create stored prvcedures and functions 453 The syntax of the SIGNAL statement SIGNAL SQLSTATE [VALUE] sqlstate_value [SET MESSAGE_ TEXT = message [, MYSQL_ERRNO = mysql_ error_ number]] A stored procedure that raises a predefined exception DELIMITER// CREATE PROCEDURE update_ invoices_credit_total ( invoice_ id_param INT, credit_ total_param DECIMAL(9,2) ) BEGIN -- Validate paramater values IF credit_ total_param < 0 THEN SIGNAL SQLSTATE 1 22003 1 SET MESSAGE_ TEXT = 'The credit_total col11mn. must be greater than or equal to 0. ', MYSQL_ERRNO = 1146; ELSEIF credit_ total_param >= 1000 THEN SIGNAL SQLSTATE 1 22003 1 SET MESSAGE_ TEXT = 'The credit total column must be less than 1000.', MYSQL_ERRNO = 1146; END IF; -- Set default values for parameters IF credit_ total_param IS NULL THEN SET credit_ total_param = 100; END IF; UPDATE invoices SET credit_total = credit_ total_param WHERE invoice_ id = invoice_ id__param; END// A statement that calls the procedure CALL update_ invoices_credit_ total(S6, -100); The response from the system Error Code: 1146. The credit_total column must be greater than or equal to 0. Description

statement that calls the procedure CALL update_ invoices_credit_ total(S6, -100); The response from the system Error Code: 1146. The credit_total column must be greater than or equal to 0. Description • It's generally considered a good practice to validate the data within a stored proce- dure before using the data. This is referred to as data validation. • The SIGNAL statement raises an error. When you raise an error, you must specify a SQLSTATE code as specified in chapter 13. In addition, you can optionally specify an error message or MySQL error number. • When you raise an error, MySQL returns the error to the caller in the same way that it returns errors that are raised by the database engine. Then, the calling program can handle the error. Figure 15-4 How to validate parameters and raise errors

## Related Concepts

- [transactions](./transactions.md)
- [functions](./functions.md)

---

**Tags:** `mysql` `stored-procedures` `programming`
