# Views

🟡 **Difficulty:** Intermediate
⏱️ **Estimated Read Time:** 35 minutes

## Overview

Creating and using virtual tables based on SELECT queries

📖 *Source: Page 380, Page 381, Page 382, Page 383, Page 384, Page 385, Page 386, Page 387, Page 388, Page 389*

## Definition

360 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, For most of the columns in these tables, I coded a NOT NULL constraint or a DEFAULT attribute. In general, I only allow a column to accept null values when I want to allow for unknown values. If, for example, a vendor doesn't supply an address, the address is unknown. In that case, you can store a null value in the vendor address 1 and vendor address2 columns. - - Another option is to store an empty string for these columns. To do that, I could have defmed the vendor address columns like this: vendor_addressl VARCHAR(SO} DEFAULT 1 ', vendor_address2 VARCHAR(SO) DEFAULT'', In this case, empty strings will be stored for these columns un]ess other values are assigned to them. In practice, a null value is a 1nore intuitive representation of an unknown value than a default value is. Conversely, it makes sense to use a default value like an empty string to indicate that a value is known but the column is empty. For example, an empty string might indicate that a

to use a default value like an empty string to indicate that a value is known but the column is empty. For example, an empty string might indicate that a vendor hasn't provided its street address. Although how you use nulls and empty strings is largely a matter of personal preference, it does affect the way you query a table. When a primary key consisted of a single column, I coded the PRIMARY KEY constraint at the column level. Similarly, I coded the UNIQUE constraint at the column level. As a result, I didn't provide names for these constraints. However, whenever I coded a primary key or foreign key constraint at the table level, I followed a convention that begins with the name of the table or an abbreviated name for the table. As you know, when MySQL creates a table, it automatically creates indexes for the primary key, foreign keys, and unique keys. MySQL uses the name ''PRIMARY'' for the name of the index for a table's p1imary key. It uses the name of the column for the name

keys, and unique keys. MySQL uses the name ''PRIMARY'' for the name of the index for a table's p1imary key. It uses the name of the column for the name of the index for a unique key. And it uses the name of the foreign key for the name of the index for a foreign key column. For the Invoices table, for example, MySQL automatically creates an index named ''PRIMARY'' for the invoice_id column, it creates an index named invoices_fk_ vendors for the vendor_id column, and it creates an index named invoices_fk_terrns for the terrns_id column. In addition to the indexes that are created automatically, I used a CREATE INDEX statement to create an index for the invoice date column in the Invoices table. Since this column is frequently used to search for rows in this table, this index should improve performance of the database. To name this index, I followed the naming conventions presented earlier in this chapter. As a result, when you view the name of an index, you can easily identify the table and column that's being

followed the naming conventions presented earlier in this chapter. As a result, when you view the name of an index, you can easily identify the table and column that's being indexed.

Chapter 11 How to create databases, tables, and indexes The SQL script that creates the AP database CREATE TABLE ( • • invoices invoice_ id vendor_ id invoice_number invoice_date invoice_ total payment_ total credit_ total INT PRIMARY KEY ) ; terms_ id INT VARCHAR(SO) DATE DECIMAL(9,2) DECIMAL(9,2) DECIMAL(9,2) INT invoice_due_date DATE payment_date DATE, CONSTRAINT invoices_ fk vendors FOREIGN KEY (vendor id) REFERENCES vendors (vendor_ id), CONSTRAINT invoices_ fk_terms FOREIGN KEY (terms_ id) REFERENCES terms (terms id) CREATE TABLE invoice line items ( invoice_ id INT • • 1nvo1ce_sequence INT INT NOT NOT NOT NOT NOT NOT NOT NOT account number line_ item_amount line_ item_description CONSTRAINT line_ items_pk DECIMAL(9,2) VARCHAR(lOO) NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL NULL NULL, NULL, NOT NOT NOT NOT NOT PRIMARY KEY (invoice_ id, invoice_sequence), CONSTRAINT line_ items_ fk_ invoices FOREIGN KEY (invoice id) REFERENCES invoices (invoice_ id), CONSTRAINT line_ items_ fk_acounts FOREIGN KEY (account number) NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL, AUTO_ INCREMENT, DEFAULT O, DEFAULT 0, REFERENCES general_ ledger_accounts (account number) ) ; -- create an index CREATE INDEX invoices_ invoice date ix ON invoices (invoice_date DESC);

NULL, NULL, NULL, AUTO_ INCREMENT, DEFAULT O, DEFAULT 0, REFERENCES general_ ledger_accounts (account number) ) ; -- create an index CREATE INDEX invoices_ invoice date ix ON invoices (invoice_date DESC); Figure 11-9 The script used to create the AP database (part 2 of 2) Page2 361

362 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How to use MySQL Workbench Since you often use a script to create tables and other database objects, it's important to understand the DDL skills presented in this chapter. Once you understand these skills, it's easy to learn how to use a graphical user interface such as MySQL Workbench to work with database objects such as tables and indexes. For example, it's often useful to view these database objects before writing the SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statements that use them. How to work with the columns of a table Figure 11-10 shows how to work with the column defmitions of a table. To start, you can view the column defmitions for a table by right-clicking on the table in the Navigator window and selecting Alter Table to display the table in the main window. Then, click on the Columns tab at the bottom of the window. For example, this figure shows the columns for the Invoices table. Here, you can see the name, data type, and other attributes of each column. For

bottom of the window. For example, this figure shows the columns for the Invoices table. Here, you can see the name, data type, and other attributes of each column. For instance, you can see that the invoice_id column is the primary key column and an auto increment column. The payment_total and credit_total columns specify a default value of 0.00. And the pay1nent_date column allows null values and its default value is NULL. If you need to add a new column, you can double-click below the last name in the Column Name column. Then, you can type in a name for the new column, and you can specify its attributes to the right of the column name. You can also work with a new or existing column using the controls below the list of columns. In this figure, for example, I've selected the invoice_id column, so the information for that column is displayed below the column list. This is useful if you aren't familiar with the abbreviations that are used for the check boxes in the column list, since these attributes

is displayed below the column list. This is useful if you aren't familiar with the abbreviations that are used for the check boxes in the column list, since these attributes are clearly identified by the check boxes below the list. You can also use the Charset and Collation drop- down lists to change the character set and collation for some columns. You'll learn more about that later in this chapter.

Chapter 11 How to create databases, tables, and indexes The column definitions for the Invoices table ■ MySQl. Workbench D X 6 Local instance MySQL80 x File Edit Vtew Query Database ServeT Tools Scripting Help N IV gato, Quay, il:4❖?ftlffll'1il-L ____________________ _ SOlEMAS ~ IFllter abJeds ., J ap T'al Tables ► Iii general_ledg,r_accounts ► i1 invoice_1rchlve ► iii lnvolce_hne_items ► ii Invoices ► ii terms ► Iii vendor_contacts ► El vendors loJ Viev.-s 'ell stored Procedures lc)l Functions ► ex ► om .. =• Adminlstntlon Schemas lnformabon Tab~ 1nll0lces Columns: in • . 1d nt{U) Al PK v~ id nt{ll) lnvoice_runber varctw(SO) invoice date date nvoice_ liita! deornel{9, 2l payment_tutal ~9,2 aedit_tutal deo 9,2 ternts_id r,t{U) j ,., V V Table Name: E._ _______ ___.I Schema: ap Olarset/Collation: utft!mb4 v utfanb4_0900_ v Engine: [!maOB Cooments: ColumnName ,nvoic,_ld vendor_icf lnvofce_number involce_d1te lnvoice_total < Datatype INT{ll) INT{l 1) VARCHAR(SO) DATE OECIMAL(9,2) Cdl.lm Name: ,__l 1nv_oice_1c1 _____ _. Olarsetft:;olaban: L Default Cobb --~ C0!!1!lents: PK ~ UQ 8 LN 1r E2l E2l □ □ □ □ □ E2l □ □ □ □

Cdl.lm Name: ,__l 1nv_oice_1c1 _____ _. Olarsetft:;olaban: L Default Cobb --~ C0!!1!lents: PK ~ UQ 8 LN 1r E2l E2l □ □ □ □ □ E2l □ □ □ □ □ E2l □ □ □ □ □ E2l □ □ □ □ □ E2l □ □ □ □ Data Type: IINT(ll) OefcNJt: SU>rage: Virtual E2l Pnmary Key □ Binary E2) Aull> Increment Columns Indexes Foreign IC~~ Tng11ers Partitioning Optiom Al G Oefautft=xpresslon E2l □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ □ Stured E2l NotNul □ lhque □Unsigned D ZeroAII 0 Gerle'ated V > --- .-1.,- Aat. "4:ata ObJ,c: Info Session Revert Description • To view the columns for a table, right-click on the table in the Navigator window, select the Alter Table item, and click on the Columns tab. • To rename a column, double-click on the column name and enter the new name. • To change the data type for a column, click on the data type in the Datatype colt1mn. Then, select a data type from the drop-down list that's displayed. • To change the default value

type for a column, click on the data type in the Datatype colt1mn. Then, select a data type from the drop-down list that's displayed. • To change the default value for a column, enter a new default valt1e in the Default column. • To change other attributes of the column, check or uncheck the attribute check boxes to the right of the column. • To drop a column, right-click on the column name and select the Delete Selected item. • To move a column up or down, right-click on the column name and select the Move Up or Move Down item. You can also use the Up and Down keys on the keyboard. • To add a new column, double-click in the Column Name column below the last column and type in a new name. Then, specify the attributes for the new column. • To apply the changes to the table, click the Apply button. To reverse the changes, click the Revert button. Figure 11-10 How to work with the columns of a table y 363

## Syntax

364 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How to work with the indexes of a table Although MySQL Workbench provides several ways to work with indexes, one of the easiest is to right-click on the table in the Navigator window and select the Alter Table command to display the table defmition. Then, you can click on the Indexes tab to display the indexes of the table. For example, figure 11-11 shows the indexes for the Invoices table. In most cases, you'll use this tab to add indexes to a table. To do that, you start by double-clicking below the last index name and entering the name of the new index. Then, you can select the type of index you want to create, the column or columns you want to index, and the order for each column. To change or drop an index, you can use the skills presented in this figure.

Chapter 11 How to create databases, tables, and indexes The indexes for the Invoices table ■ MySQl. Workbench D X 6 Local instance MySQLSO x File Edit Vtew Query Database Sefver Tools Scripting Help fjl &il lil &l Bi!l rai ~ SCHEMAS ~ IRter ol)Jccn • U ap • Tables ► II oenual_ledoer_accounts ► i1 invoice_archive ► iii ln,olce_hne_items ► C Invoices ► El turns ► &l vendor_conta<ts ► Cl vendors Views 'cl'.l stored Procedures 'cl Functions ► ex ► om .. =• Administration Schemas Information Columns: = ~ ~~i~j Al PK nvoke_runber vardw(SO) invoic~ date. dare nvoice.Jiital drotN,1{9,2) payment_total deomal(9,2) aedit_total deomo1(9,2J te.rms_id nt(U) --- ~.., Aa ♦a .-.st. Ob)ea Info S5SIOO Description j ,., V V Query 1 il:1-:\i& Table Name: F I Schema: ap L-----------' Olarset/Collation: utfl!tnb4 v lutf8mb4_0900_ v Engine: [ lmoOB Cooments: Index Name Tyi:,e tndexCoums-------- PRIMARY PRIMARY mvo,ces_l'k_vendors INDEX lnvoices_fk_terms INDEX mvo1cesjnvoice_~. 1NOEX Column ;; 0 ,nvoice_d 0 veodor_ld 0 lnvolce_number 0 invoice_date l 0 lnvoice_total 0 payment_total 0 credit_tota 0 terms_ld 0 involce_due_date D payment_date < Columns Ind~ Foreio11 Keys Tnogers Partrtionlng OptioM

;; 0 ,nvoice_d 0 veodor_ld 0 lnvolce_number 0 invoice_date l 0 lnvoice_total 0 payment_total 0 credit_tota 0 terms_ld 0 involce_due_date D payment_date < Columns Ind~ Foreio11 Keys Tnogers Partrtionlng OptioM ~ l~ ASC ASC ASC DESC ASC ASC ASC ASC ASC ASC > Index Opbons Storage Type: Key Block Sae: lo Parser: I V~: 1:21 Index Comment • To view the indexes for a table, right-click on the table in the Navigator window, select the Alter Table item, and click on the Indexes tab. • To rename an index, double-click on the name and enter the new name. • To change the type of an index, click on the Type column. Then, select a type from the drop-down list that appears. Revert • To change the colu1nn that's indexed, select the index and then select its column in the list of columns that appears. You can also change the sort order of the index by clicking in the Order column and then selecting ASC or DESC from the drop-down list that appears. • To drop an index, right-click on the

order of the index by clicking in the Order column and then selecting ASC or DESC from the drop-down list that appears. • To drop an index, right-click on the index name and select the Delete Selected item. • To add a new index, double-click below the last index name and type in a new name. Then, specify the type, column, and order for the index. • To apply the changes to the table, click the Apply button. To reverse the changes, click the Revert button. Figure 11 -11 How to work with the indexes of a table V 365

## Examples

366 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How to work with the foreign keys of a table To work with the foreign keys of a table, you use the Foreign Keys tab. For example, figure 11-12 shows the foreign keys for the Invoices table, and the foreign key named invoices_fk_terms is selected. Here, MySQL Workbench shows the table that's refe1·enced by the foreign key, the foreign key column, and the column that's referenced by the foreign key. If you need to, you can change any of the information that defmes the foreign key as described in this figure. You can also add new foreign keys, and you can drop existing keys.

Chapter 11 How to create databases, tables, and indexes The foreign keys for the Invoices table ■ MySQl. Workbench D X 6 1.oca1 IMlance MySOLSO x File Edit Vtew Query Database Server Tools Scripting Help ouerv 1 il:1·\Hftlffll,;i■iiL _____________________ _ SCHEMAS ~ 1Ft11er abjects T J ap T Tables ► □ oeneral_ledoer_accounts ► il invoice_archlve ► Ii lnvolce_hne_1tems ► 0 Invoice. j ,.. Table Name: fi±es,___ _______ _,I Schema: ap OiarsetjCollation: utft!tnb4 v lutf8mb4_0900_ v ~: llmoOB V C«nments: Qiunn Refereoced Cobl Foreign Key Options ► Eil terms ► Iii vendor_contaas ► D vendors Vlev.s Foreq1 Key Name lnvolce~_fk_terrm invoices _flc_ ve:ndcn Referenced Table ·ap· : terms· · ap · : vendors· D invoice_id D vendor_id On ~ate: RESTRICT -------=::::: 'ell stored Procedures ► ex ► om .. =• Functions Administration Schemas Inform<lbon Columns: ~~ ~ ~~~~ Al PK lnvoice_runber vardl.Y(SO) invoice date date rwoice_lotal deomlll(9,fil payment_total deomal(9,2 aedit_total deomal(9, terms_id nt(U) --- _,._ Aa ♦• ris.,_ Objea Info Sess-lon Description .., .., D lnvolce_number D invoice_date D invo1ce_total D payme:nt_total D aed1t_total 0 terms_id terms_id D invo1ce_due_date D payment_date

terms_id nt(U) --- _,._ Aa ♦• ris.,_ Objea Info Sess-lon Description .., .., D lnvolce_number D invoice_date D invo1ce_total D payme:nt_total D aed1t_total 0 terms_id terms_id D invo1ce_due_date D payment_date < > < Columns lndexes Fore19n Keys Tnggl!TS Partitioning Optioro On Delete: R.ESTRrCT D Slap In SQl gener-ation For~ Kev Comme-tt ---- > • To view the foreign keys for a table, right-click on the table in the Navigator window, select the Alter Table item, and click on the Foreign Keys tab. • To rename a foreign key, double-click on the name and enter the new name. • To change the referenced table, click on the table name in the Referenced Table colt1m.n and select a table from the drop-down }jst that appears. • To change the colu1nn or referenced column for a foreign key, select the foreign key and then select the column or referenced column in the list that appears. • To drop a foreign key, right-click on its name and select the Delete Selected item. • To add a new foreign key, double-click below the last foreign

that appears. • To drop a foreign key, right-click on its name and select the Delete Selected item. • To add a new foreign key, double-click below the last foreign key name and type in a new name. Then, specify the referenced table, foreign key column, and referenced column. • To apply the changes to the table, click the Apply button. To reverse the changes, click the Revert button. Figure 11 -12 How to work with the foreign keys of a table 367

368 Section 3 Database design and impleme11,tation, How to work with character sets and collations So far, this book has assumed that you're working with the default chai·acter set and collation for yoL1r MySQL server. In this topic, you'll learn more about characters sets and collations and why yoLI might want to use a character set or collation that's different from the default. Then, you'll learn how to specify the character set and collation for a database, a table, or even a column. An introduction to character sets and collations When a column is defmed with a string type such as CHAR or VARCHAR, MySQL stores a numeric value for each character. Then, it uses a character set to map the numeric values to the characters of the string. Figure 11-13 begins by presenting three character sets that are commonly used by MySQL. To start, it presents the default character set for MySQL 5.5 and earlier: the latinl character set. This character set uses one byte per character to provide for most characters in Western European languages. However, if you

set for MySQL 5.5 and earlier: the latinl character set. This character set uses one byte per character to provide for most characters in Western European languages. However, if you need to store other characters, you can use the utf8mb3 or utf8mb4 character set. The utf8mb3 character set is the default for MySQL 5.6 and 5.7, and the utf8mb4 character set is the default for MySQL 8.0 and later. Currently, MySQL refers to the utf8mb3 character set with the alias utf8. However, the t1tf8mb3 character set is deprecated and will be removed in a future release of MySQL. When that happens, t1tf8 will become an alias for the utf8mb4 character set. Because of that, you should explicitly specify utf8mb4 if th,at's the character set you want to use. The advantage of the utf8mb4 character set is that it provides for all charac- ters specified by the Unicode character set. This includes most characters from most languages worldwide. As a result, it's appropriate when you 're going to be working with a global application that needs to be able to store

includes most characters from most languages worldwide. As a result, it's appropriate when you 're going to be working with a global application that needs to be able to store characters from multiple languages. You can also use it to store chai·acters like emojis, which are becoming more and more common. The disadvantage of the utf8mb4 character set is that it can use up to four bytes per character. This forces MySQL to reserve four bytes per character for each character in the CHAR type. As a result, this can increase data storage requirements for a database that makes extensive use of the CHAR type. Fortunately, this typically isn't an issue. If it is, you can fix the issue by using the VARCHAR type instead of the CHAR type. Every character set has a corresponding collation that determines how the characters within the set are sorted. For example, the latinl character set uses the collation named latinl_swedish_ci by default, since MySQL was developed in Sweden. Here, the beginning of the name shows that it corresponds with the latin 1 character

character set uses the collation named latinl_swedish_ci by default, since MySQL was developed in Sweden. Here, the beginning of the name shows that it corresponds with the latin 1 character set. In addition, the ci at the end shows that it is case-insensitive. This means that MySQL sorts uppercase letters such as A and lowercase letters such as a at the same level, which is usually what you want.

## Common Mistakes

Chapter 11 How to create databases, tables, and indexes 369 Three commonly used character sets Name Description latinl The latinl character set uses one byte per character to provide for most characters in Western European languages. utf8mb3 The utf8mb3 character set uses one to three bytes per character to provide for aJJ characters specified by the Unicode character set. This character set provides for most characters in most of the world's languages. utf8mb4 The utf8mb4 character set uses one to four bytes per character to provide for all char- acters specified by the Unicode character set, plus additional characters like emojis. Four collations for the latin1 character set Name Description latinl swedish ci - - latinl general ci - - latinl general cs - - latinl bin - The default collation for the latinl character set. A general purpose, case-insensitive collation. A general purpose, case-sensitive collation. The binary collation for this character set. Four collations for the utf8mb3 character set Name Description utf8_general_ ci utf8 unicode ci - utf8 spanish c i - - utf8 bin The default co]lation for

this character set. Four collations for the utf8mb3 character set Name Description utf8_general_ ci utf8 unicode ci - utf8 spanish c i - - utf8 bin The default co]lation for the utf8mb3 (utf8) character set. A case-insensitive collation that provides for more correct so1ting. A case-insensitive collation for the Spanish language. The binary col]atio11 for this character set. Three collations for the utf8mb4 character set Name Description ut f8mb4 0 900 . . al. Cl. - - - utf8mb4 0900 as cs utf8mb4 bin Description The default collation for the utf8rnb4 character set. An accent-sensitive, case-sensitive collatio.n. The binary collation for this charactei- set. • The character set that's used by a database, table, or column determines which characters can be stored and how many bytes are used to store the characters. • Every character set has a corresponding collation that determines how the characters within the set are sorted. • If the name of a collation ends with ci, the collation is case-insensitive. If the name of a collation ends with cs, the collation is case-sensitive. • If the

• If the name of a collation ends with ci, the collation is case-insensitive. If the name of a collation ends with cs, the collation is case-sensitive. • If the name of a collation includes ai, the collation is accent-insensitive. If the name of a collation includes as, the collation is accent-sensitive. • If the name of a collation ends with bin, the collation is binary, which means that the characters are sorted according to the binary numbers that correspond to each character. Figure 11-13 An introduction to character sets and collations

## Related Concepts

- [select-basics](./select-basics.md)

---

**Tags:** `sql` `views`
